عربي
Bahasa Indonesia
Deutsch
English
Español
Français
Italiano
Português
Tiếng Việt
Türkçe
Ρусский
ไทย
日本語
한국어
中文 (简体)
中文 (繁體)
My Profile
Sign out of AWS Builder ID
AWS Management Console
Account Settings
Billing & Cost Management
Security Credentials
AWS Personal Health Dashboard
Support Center
Expert Help
Knowledge Center
AWS Support Overview
AWS re:Post
AWS›
Training and Certification
AWS Training and Certification
Explore what’s new
Develop your generative AI career with training content built by AWS experts
Grow your cloud career with 200+ gen AI-powered simulations paired with hands-on labs
Get the flexibility of digital training with the depth of classroom training
Become a cloud developer in as little as 9 months – no tech background needed
Get started with training by role or domain
Cloud Practitioner
Learn cloud fundamentals and best practices
Solutions Architect
Learn to design highly available systems
Developer
Learn to develop applications for the cloud
Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence
Learn how to apply machine learning, artificial intelligence, and deep learning to innovate faster
Security
Learn the processes and best practices for securing the AWS platform
Data analytics
Learn to design, build, secure, and maintain analytics solutions
Ways to learn
Digital training
Begin learning by accessing 600+ free digital courses, curated by the experts at AWS. Unlock diverse lab experiences and more by becoming an AWS Skill Builder subscriber.
AWS Certification Exam preparation
Prepare for certification exams with training and materials that complement your hands-on AWS experience.
Training for AWS Partners
Build practical skills and cloud expertise with engaging and interactive learning experiences designed for AWS Partners.
Free training events
Join us for free, fun, and interactive training on Twitch, virtual events, and more.
Classroom training
Ask questions, work through solutions in person, and get feedback from AWS-accredited instructors with deep technical knowledge.
AWS Educate
Join AWS Educate for free cloud content and labs curated for individuals as young as 13, plus access to an exclusive job board and the AWS Emerging Talent Community.
Build Your AWS Cloud skills with Ramp-Up Guides
Our downloadable Ramp-Up Guides offer a variety of resources to help build your skills and knowledge of the AWS Cloud. Each guide, features carefully selected digital training, classroom courses, videos, whitepapers, certifications and more to remove the guesswork of learning AWS.
Download the Generative AI Ramp-Up Guide
Benefits of AWS Training and Certification
Learn at your own pace
Exploreself-paced digital trainingthat's available on demand when and where it's convenient for you. Take the next step in your cloud journey and learn by doing with interactive digital training, available on-demand as part ofAWS Skill Builder subscriptions.
Train with an AWS expert
Build technical skills and learn best practices from anaccredited instructor. Choose in-person or virtual courses.
Choose your training path
Follow a recommendedlearning planfor a specific domain or job role. You can also skip around—it's flexible.
Get AWS Certified
Validate your AWS Cloud skills and enhance your credibility with anindustry-recognized credentialvirtually with online proctoring or in a testing center.
What people are saying
Find out what learners and leaders are saying about the transformative impact of building AWS Cloud skills.
Learn more
Explore more AWS Training
Innovate globally, educate locally when you work with a global AWS Training Partner who is trusted to deliver official AWS-authored digital and classroom training.
Explore AWS Ramp-Up Guides for resources to help you build your AWS Cloud skills by role, solution, or industry.
Still have questions about training?
Did you find what you were looking for today?
Let us know so we can improve the quality of the content on our pages.