GitTutorial
Gitand {{title}}
GitContribute
GitUndo
GitAdvanced
GitExercises
GitTutorial
Learn Git
Git is a tool that helps you:
save and manage different versions of your files and code.
work with others, keep track of changes, and undo mistakes.
Where to use Git?
Git works on your computer, but you also use it with online services likeGitHub,GitLab, orBitbucketto share your work with others. These are calledremote repositories.
In this tutorial, you'll learn how to use Git for your own projects and how to connect with remote repositories online.
Learning by Examples
In this tutorial, we will show you Git commands like this:
Example
git --version
git version 2.30.2.windows.1
git --version
git version 2.30.2.windows.1
For new users, using the terminal view can seem a bit complicated.
Don't worry! We will keep it really simple, and learning this way gives you a good grasp of how Git works.
In the code above, you can see commands (input) and output.
Lines like this are commands we input:
Example
git --version
git --version
Lines like this are the output/response to our commands:
Example
git version 2.30.2.windows.1
git version 2.30.2.windows.1
In general, lines with$in front of it is input.
$
These are the commands you can copy and run in your terminal.
Tip for Beginners:Don't worry about making mistakes!
When you use Git on your own computer, you can't really break anything important.
Experimenting is a great way to learn, and you can always undo or redo changes as you go.
Change Platform:
What Changes When You Switch Platform?
The tutorial can show examples for GitHub, GitLab, or Bitbucket.
The Git commands are mostly the same, but some steps (like connecting to a remote or pushing code) might look a little different depending on the platform you choose.
Use the menu to see examples for each platform.
Why Practice with Exercises?
Practicing with exercises helps you remember the commands and understand how Git works.
Try the exercises and quiz to test your knowledge!
Git Quiz
Test your Git skills with a quiz.
Start Git Quiz
Track Your Progress
Create a free W3Schools account and get access to more features and learning materials:
View your completed tutorials, exercises, and quizzes
Keep an eye on your progress and daily streaks
Set goals and create learning paths
Create your own personal website
Sign Up for Free
Note:This is an optional feature. You can study at W3Schools without creating an account.
COLOR PICKER
Contact Sales
If you want to use W3Schools services as an educational institution, team or enterprise, send us an e-mail:sales@w3schools.com
Report Error
If you want to report an error, or if you want to make a suggestion, send us an e-mail:help@w3schools.com
Top Tutorials
Top References
Top Examples
Get Certified

[Images saved with this article:]
www.w3schools.com_git_img_remote_github.png
www.w3schools.com_git_img_remote_bitbucket.png
www.w3schools.com_git_img_remote_gitlab.png
www.w3schools.com_images_img_fa_up_300.png
www.w3schools.com_images_colorpicker2000.png