DBMS - Home
DBMS - Overview
DBMS - Architecture
DBMS - Data Models
DBMS - Data Schemas
DBMS - Data Independence
DBMS - ER Model Basic Concepts
DBMS - ER Diagram Representation
DBMS - Generalization, Aggregation
Relational Model
DBMS - Codd's Rules
DBMS - Relational Data Model
DBMS - Relational Algebra
DBMS - ER to Relational Model
Relational Database Design
DBMS - Database Normalization
DBMS - Database Joins
Storage and File Structure
DBMS - Storage System
DBMS - File Structure
Indexing and Hashing
DBMS - Indexing
DBMS - Hashing
Transaction And Concurrency
DBMS - Transaction
DBMS - Concurrency Control
DBMS - Deadlock
Backup and Recovery
DBMS - Data Backup
DBMS - Data Recovery
DBMS Useful Resources
DBMS - Quick Guide
DBMS - Useful Resources
DBMS - Discussion
Selected Reading
UPSC IAS Exams Notes
Developer's Best Practices
Questions and Answers
Effective Resume Writing
AI Based Resume Builder
Personal AI Study Assistant
Generate Coding Logic
HR Interview Questions
Computer Glossary
Who is Who
DBMS Tutorial
DBMS Tutorial
Why to Learn DBMS?
DBMS Characteristics
Who Should Learn DBMS
Prerequisites to Learn DBMS
DBMS Jobs and Opportunities
Frequently Asked Questions about DBMS
DBMS Tutorial
Database Management SystemorDBMSin short refers to the technology of storing and retrieving users' data with utmost efficiency along with appropriate security measures. This tutorial explains the basics of DBMS such as its architecture, data models, data schema, data independence, E-R model, relation model, relational database design, and storage and file structure and much more.
Why to Learn DBMS?
Traditionally, data was organized in file formats. DBMS was a new concept then, and all the research was done to make it overcome the deficiencies in traditional style of data management. A modern DBMS has the following characteristics −
Real-world entity− A modern DBMS is more realistic and uses real-world entities to design its architecture. It uses the behavior and attributes too. For example, a school database may use students as an entity and their age as an attribute.
Real-world entity− A modern DBMS is more realistic and uses real-world entities to design its architecture. It uses the behavior and attributes too. For example, a school database may use students as an entity and their age as an attribute.
Relation-based tables− DBMS allows entities and relations among them to form tables. A user can understand the architecture of a database just by looking at the table names.
Relation-based tables− DBMS allows entities and relations among them to form tables. A user can understand the architecture of a database just by looking at the table names.
Isolation of data and application− A database system is entirely different than its data. A database is an active entity, whereas data is said to be passive, on which the database works and organizes. DBMS also stores metadata, which is data about data, to ease its own process.
Isolation of data and application− A database system is entirely different than its data. A database is an active entity, whereas data is said to be passive, on which the database works and organizes. DBMS also stores metadata, which is data about data, to ease its own process.
Less redundancy− DBMS follows the rules of normalization, which splits a relation when any of its attributes is having redundancy in values. Normalization is a mathematically rich and scientific process that reduces data redundancy.
Less redundancy− DBMS follows the rules of normalization, which splits a relation when any of its attributes is having redundancy in values. Normalization is a mathematically rich and scientific process that reduces data redundancy.
Consistency− Consistency is a state where every relation in a database remains consistent. There exist methods and techniques, which can detect attempt of leaving database in inconsistent state. A DBMS can provide greater consistency as compared to earlier forms of data storing applications like file-processing systems.
Consistency− Consistency is a state where every relation in a database remains consistent. There exist methods and techniques, which can detect attempt of leaving database in inconsistent state. A DBMS can provide greater consistency as compared to earlier forms of data storing applications like file-processing systems.
Query Language− DBMS is equipped with query language, which makes it more efficient to retrieve and manipulate data. A user can apply as many and as different filtering options as required to retrieve a set of data. Traditionally it was not possible where file-processing system was used.
Query Language− DBMS is equipped with query language, which makes it more efficient to retrieve and manipulate data. A user can apply as many and as different filtering options as required to retrieve a set of data. Traditionally it was not possible where file-processing system was used.
DBMS Characteristics
Databaseis a collection of related data and data is a collection of facts and figures that can be processed to produce information. Mostly data represents recordable facts. Data aids in producing information, which is based on facts. For example, if we have data about marks obtained by all students, we can then conclude about toppers and average marks.
Adatabase management systemstores data in such a way that it becomes easier to retrieve, manipulate, and produce information. Following are the important characteristics of DBMS.
ACID Properties− DBMS follows the concepts ofAtomicity,Consistency,Isolation, andDurability (normally shortened as ACID). These concepts are applied on transactions, which manipulate data in a database. ACID properties help the database stay healthy in multi-transactional environments and in case of failure.
ACID Properties− DBMS follows the concepts ofAtomicity,Consistency,Isolation, andDurability (normally shortened as ACID). These concepts are applied on transactions, which manipulate data in a database. ACID properties help the database stay healthy in multi-transactional environments and in case of failure.
Multiuser and Concurrent Access− DBMS supports multi-user environment and allows them to access and manipulate data in parallel. Though there are restrictions on transactions when users attempt to handle the same data item, but users are always unaware of them.
Multiuser and Concurrent Access− DBMS supports multi-user environment and allows them to access and manipulate data in parallel. Though there are restrictions on transactions when users attempt to handle the same data item, but users are always unaware of them.
Multiple views− DBMS offers multiple views for different users. A user who is in the Sales department will have a different view of database than a person working in the Production department. This feature enables the users to have a concentrate view of the database according to their requirements.
Multiple views− DBMS offers multiple views for different users. A user who is in the Sales department will have a different view of database than a person working in the Production department. This feature enables the users to have a concentrate view of the database according to their requirements.
Security− Features like multiple views offer security to some extent where users are unable to access data of other users and departments. DBMS offers methods to impose constraints while entering data into the database and retrieving the same at a later stage. DBMS offers many different levels of security features, which enables multiple users to have different views with different features.
Security− Features like multiple views offer security to some extent where users are unable to access data of other users and departments. DBMS offers methods to impose constraints while entering data into the database and retrieving the same at a later stage. DBMS offers many different levels of security features, which enables multiple users to have different views with different features.
Who Should Learn DBMS
ThisDBMS tutorialwill especially help computer science graduates in understanding the basic-to-advanced concepts related to Database Management Systems.
Prerequisites to Learn SQL
Before you start proceeding with this tutorial, it is recommended that you have a good understanding of basic computer concepts such as primary memory, secondary memory, and basics of data structures and algorithms.
DBMS Jobs and Opportunities
The modern technologies like big data, cloud computing, and IoT created a high demand for DBMS professionals. Almost every major company is recruiting IT professionals having good experience with DBMS.
Following are the job roles for which you can apply after learning DBMS −
Database Administrator (DBA)
Data Analyst
Database manager
Data Scientist
Database Testers
Cloud Database Expert
Information Security Analyst
Data Modeler
Many more...
So, you could be the next potential employee for any major companies who hires DBMS experts. Start learning DBMS using our simple and effective tutorial anywhere and anytime absolutely at your pace.
Frequently Asked Questions about DBMS
There are numerous Frequently Asked Questions(FAQ) about DBMS, this section tries to answer some of them briefly.
The full form of DBMS is Database Management System.
A database can be defined as an organized collection of structured data or information. It can be stored either locally or on a remote server.
Components of a DBMS is listed below −
Hardware −It refers to the physical machines or devices such as servers and storage systems.
Hardware −It refers to the physical machines or devices such as servers and storage systems.
Software −It is the set of commands or programs that controls the database.
Software −It is the set of commands or programs that controls the database.
Data −This is the information stored in database.
Data −This is the information stored in database.
Data Access Language −DBMS requires a language like SQL to interact with the database.
Data Access Language −DBMS requires a language like SQL to interact with the database.
Users −People who interact with the database are called users. They can be database administrators, developers, and end-users.
Users −People who interact with the database are called users. They can be database administrators, developers, and end-users.
Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, and Durability are known as the ACID properties of DBMS.
Database constraints are some set of rules or conditions that controls behavior of a database table.
A primary key in DBMS is a unique identifier for a record in the specified table. It make sure that each record can be uniquely identified and cannot contain NULL values.
A composite key is a type of primary key that consists of two or more columns together to uniquely identify a record in a table.
An ER diagram in DBMS is a visual representation of the database schema. Its full form is Entity Relationship Diagram. It shows the entities, their attributes, and the relationships between them.
A database view is a virtual table that is created when a query is written using data access language like SQL.
A set of instructions that is automatically executed in response to certain events on a particular table or view is called as database trigger.

[Images saved with this article:]
www.tutorialspoint.com_dbms_images_dbms-mini-logo.jpg
www.tutorialspoint.com_dbms_images_dbms.jpg