Notice:While JavaScript is not essential for this website, your interaction with the content will be limited. Please turn JavaScript on for the full experience.
AASmallerLargerReset
Smaller
Larger
Reset
SocializeLinkedInMastodonChat on IRCTwitter
LinkedIn
Mastodon
Chat on IRC
Twitter
The Python Software Foundation is an organization devoted to advancing open source technology related to the Python programming language.
We support the Python Community through...
Grants
In 2024, the PSF awarded $655,000 USD to 257 groups or individuals in 61 countries around the world.
Infrastructure
We support and maintainpython.org,The Python Package Index,Python Documentation,
          and many other services the Python Community relies on.
PyCon US
We produce and underwrite thePyCon US Conference,
          the largest annual gathering for the Python community.
         Support from sponsors, attendees, PyLadies, and CPython enabled us to award more than $384,000 USD in travel grants to 254 attendees for PyCon US 2025.
Become a Member
Help the PSF promote, protect, and advance the Python programming language and community!
Membership FAQ
Donate
Assist the foundation's goals with a donation. The PSF is a recognized 501(c)(3) non-profit organization.
How to Contribute
Volunteer
Learn how you can help the PSF and the greater Python community!
How to Volunteer
Sponsors
Without our sponsors we wouldn't be able to help the Python community grow and prosper.
Sponsorship Possibilities
PSF Grants Program
The Python Software Foundation welcomes grant proposals for projects related to the development of Python, Python-related technology, and educational resources.
Proposal Guidelines, FAQ and Examples
PSF News
Announcing Python Software Foundation Fellow Members for Q1 2025! 🎉
A thank you to the Oregon State University Open Source Lab
Python Software Foundation Names New Deputy Executive Director
2025 PSF Board Election Schedule Change
PSF Grants Program 2024 Transparency Report
PSF News: PyCon US, PyPI Orgs, and Bluesky 🦋
PSF Distinguished Service Award Granted to Thomas Wouters
PSF Distinguished Service Award Granted to Van Lindberg
PSF Distinguished Service Award Granted to Ewa Jodlowska
Announcing Python Software Foundation Fellow Members for Q4 2024! 🎉

[Images saved with this article:]
www.python.org_static_img_psf-logo.png