MongoDB - Home
MongoDB - Overview
MongoDB - Advantages
MongoDB - Environment
MongoDB - Data Modeling
MongoDB - Create Database
MongoDB - Drop Database
MongoDB - Create Collection
MongoDB - Drop Collection
MongoDB - Data Types
MongoDB - Insert Document
MongoDB - Query Document
MongoDB - Update Document
MongoDB - Delete Document
MongoDB - Projection
MongoDB - Limiting Records
MongoDB - Sorting Records
MongoDB - Indexing
MongoDB - Aggregation
MongoDB - Replication
MongoDB - Sharding
MongoDB - Create Backup
MongoDB - Deployment
MongoDB - Java
MongoDB - PHP
MongoDB - Relationships
MongoDB - Database References
MongoDB - Covered Queries
MongoDB - Analyzing Queries
MongoDB - Atomic Operations
MongoDB - Advanced Indexing
MongoDB - Indexing Limitations
MongoDB - ObjectId
MongoDB - Map Reduce
MongoDB - Text Search
MongoDB - Regular Expression
Working with Rockmongo
MongoDB - GridFS
MongoDB - Capped Collections
Auto-Increment Sequence
MongoDB Useful Resources
MongoDB - Questions and Answers
MongoDB - Cheatsheet
MongoDB - Quick Guide
MongoDB - Useful Resources
MongoDB - Discussion
Selected Reading
UPSC IAS Exams Notes
Developer's Best Practices
Questions and Answers
Effective Resume Writing
AI Based Resume Builder
Personal AI Study Assistant
Generate Coding Logic
HR Interview Questions
Computer Glossary
Who is Who
MongoDB Tutorial
MongoDB Tutorial
Why to Learn MongoDB?
MongoDB Applications
Who Should Learn MongoDB
Prerequisites to Learn MongoDB
MongoDB Jobs and Opportunities
Frequently Asked Questions about MongoDB
MongoDB Tutorial
TheMongoDBis an open-source document database and leading NoSQL database. MongoDB is written in C++. This tutorial will give you great understanding on MongoDB concepts needed to create and deploy a highly scalable and performance-oriented database.
MongoDB features are flexible data models that allows the storage of unstructured data. This provides full support indexing, replication, capabilities and also user friendly APIs.
TheMongoDBis a multipurpose dataset that is used for modern application development and cloud environments. This scalable architecture enables us to handle system demands and also adding more nodes to distribute the load.
MongoDB Basic Commands
We have a list of standard MongoDb commands to interact with the database, These commands are CREATE, READ, INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE, DROP and AGGREGATE can be classified into following groups based on their nature −
Command
Description
CREATE
Creates a new table in the database and other objects in the database.
INSERT
Inserts collection name in existing database.
DROP
Deletes an entire table or specified objects in the database.
UPDATE
Updates the document into a collection.
Why to Learn MongoDB?
MongoDB can handle unstructured data, which provides better indexing and operations. MongoDB ensures the development software applications that can handle all sorts of data in a scalable way.
MongoDB is a rapid iterative development that  enables the collaboration of a large number of teams. MongoDB has become the most necessary database in the world, which makes it easy for every developer to store, manage, and retrieve data.
MongoDB Applications
MongoDB is a NoSQL database. MongoDB provides following functionality to the database programmers −
Stores user data, comments and metadata
Stores user data, comments and metadata
MongoDB performs complex analytics queries and stores the behavioral data.
MongoDB performs complex analytics queries and stores the behavioral data.
This is used to manage chain data and optimize logistics.
This is used to manage chain data and optimize logistics.
Environmental data and IoT devices are stored and analyzed.
Environmental data and IoT devices are stored and analyzed.
Who Should Learn MongoDB
ThisMongoDB tutorialwill help web developers, devops engineer, mobile apps, backend, full-stack, database administrators, etc. We recommend reading this tutorial, in the sequence listed in the left side menu.
Prerequisites to Learn MongoDB
Before proceeding with this tutorial, you should have a basic understanding of database, text editor and execution of programs, etc. Because we are going to develop high performance database, so it will be good if you have an understanding on the basic concepts of Database (RDBMS).
MongoDB is typically used in the development of applications, at least one programming language is very helpful to work with APIs.
MongoDB Jobs and Opportunities
MongoDB is in high demand professionally and it is exponentially growing in the IT industry.
In MongoDB jobs are in high demand with a growth rate of 50%. The NoSQL database market is growing at a rate of 30%.
Average salaries for a MongoDB professional are around $100,000 to $200,000. This may vary depending on the location. The Following companies recruit MongoDB professionals:
Accenture
IBM
Deloitte
Capgemini
TCS
Infosys
Wipro
Google
Amazon
Microsoft
HCL
You could be the next employee for any of these major companies. We have developed great learning material for MongoDB that helps you prepare for technical interviews and certifications. So, start learning MongoDB using our tutorial anywhere and anytime, absolutely at your place.
Frequently Asked Questions about  MongoDB
There are some very Frequently Asked Questions(FAQ) about MongoDB, this section tries to answer them briefly.
MangoDB can manage document information, stores and retrieves the information. This is used for high data storage and performing large amount of data while performing the dataset. This is a distributed database at its level, high availability, horizontal scaling are built in and easy to use.
Sharding is a database that separates large database into smaller, faster, and easily managed parts. These smaller parts are called data shards. Shard is defined as a "small part of a whole".
MongoDB is not a programming language, but this is a NOSQL database. This query language allows us to interact with the data. MongoDB is a non-relational database management system that stores the data in flexible JSON documents.
This supports multi-document transactions, even though they are less performed as compared to traditional relational databases.
This can be used in memory intensive situation because memory maps the entire data file into memory.
This is designed for eventual consistency, which means there can be a lag before all the nodes in a distributed system.
Yes, you can learn MongoDB without knowledge of SQL. MongoDB uses its own query language, which is different from SQL. You need to learn about NoSQL databases, and these vary very much from the SQL database. MongoDB Compass is a user-friendly interface that visualizes your data and understands your schema without using the command line.
MongoDB supports wide range of platforms, that are useful for developing various environments.
Operating System performs Windows 7 and Linux with various distributions.
Cloud Platform in MongoDB manages data-base-as-a-service available in Google, AWS and Azure.
Docker provides the official Docker images for deployment.
Following are MongoDB Indexes.
Single Field Index.
Compound Index.
Multikey Index.
Text Index.
Hashed Index.
MongoDB implements the primary key using the '_id' field. Every primary key acts as a different identifier for the document. This field is automatically created by MongoDB when the document is inserted. This can be any type, as long as it is different from the collection.

[Images saved with this article:]
www.tutorialspoint.com_mongodb_images_mongodb-mini-logo.jpg
www.tutorialspoint.com_mongodb_images_mongodb.jpg