Master Generative AI with 10+ Real-world Projects in 2025!
d
h
m
s
More articles in Career
By Popular
By Latest
BeginnerCareerGenerative AIGenerative AI ApplicationGenerative AI Data Scientist: A Booming New Job RoleExplore the required qualifications, job prospects, and salary trends for the promising role of a Generative AI (GenAI) Data Scientist.K.C. Sabreena Basheer15 Apr, 2025
Generative AI Data Scientist: A Booming New Job Role
Explore the required qualifications, job prospects, and salary trends for the promising role of a Generative AI (GenAI) Data Scientist.
CareerGenerative AIGenerative AI ApplicationIntermediateProjectTop 20 List of Generative AI ProjectsA curated list of the best generative AI (GenAI) projects ranging from AI assistants to agents to RAGs and more to upgrade your resume in 2025K.C. Sabreena Basheer04 Apr, 2025
Top 20 List of Generative AI Projects
A curated list of the best generative AI (GenAI) projects ranging from AI assistants to agents to RAGs and more to upgrade your resume in 2025
AdvancedAI AgentsCareerGenerative AIGenerative AI ApplicationBuilding a Resume Review Agent System with CrewAIBuild a resume reviewer AI agent system with CrewAI, that will review your resume, optimize it, and also give job recommendations.Apoorv Vishnoi13 Feb, 2025
Building a Resume Review Agent System with CrewAI
Build a resume reviewer AI agent system with CrewAI, that will review your resume, optimize it, and also give job recommendations.
BeginnerCareerChatGPTGenerative AI ApplicationInterview PrepHow to Prepare for a Job Interview with ChatGPT?Here's how you can use ChatGPT and its new Voice Mode to prepare for a job interview | mock interview with ChatGPT | interview preparationK.C. Sabreena Basheer20 Jan, 2025
How to Prepare for a Job Interview with ChatGPT?
Here's how you can use ChatGPT and its new Voice Mode to prepare for a job interview | mock interview with ChatGPT | interview preparation
BeginnerCareerGenerative AI ApplicationSoftware Engineers – Do We Need Them Anymore?With the rise of generative AI, do we still need software engineers? Let's explore the future of software engineering jobs amidst AI.K.C. Sabreena Basheer17 Jan, 2025
Software Engineers – Do We Need Them Anymore?
With the rise of generative AI, do we still need software engineers? Let's explore the future of software engineering jobs amidst AI.
AI AgentsBeginnerCareerGenerative AI ApplicationThe Effect of AI Agents on the Job Market in 2025The Effect of AI Agents in the Job Market in 2025: What to expect, how and where to upskill yourself. Read on to become job ready.K.C. Sabreena Basheer04 Jan, 2025
The Effect of AI Agents on the Job Market in 2025
The Effect of AI Agents in the Job Market in 2025: What to expect, how and where to upskill yourself. Read on to become job ready.
BeginnerCareerGenerative AIResource11 Essential GenAI Skills for Engineering StudentsLearn essential GenAI skills for engineering students to create innovative, real-world solutions and impactful AI applications.Ayushi Trivedi23 Dec, 2024
11 Essential GenAI Skills for Engineering Students
Learn essential GenAI skills for engineering students to create innovative, real-world solutions and impactful AI applications.
CareerData AnalysisLearning PathData Analyst Learning Path 2025Data Analyst learning path 2025: Skills like Excel, SQL, Python, storytelling, EDA, and machine learning covered in this 6-month plan.Aayush Tyagi03 Feb, 2025
Data Analyst Learning Path 2025
Data Analyst learning path 2025: Skills like Excel, SQL, Python, storytelling, EDA, and machine learning covered in this 6-month plan.
Artificial IntelligenceBeginnerCareerData ScienceGATE DA 2025: Eligibility, Important Dates, Syllabus and MoreFind out all about GATE DA 2025: Exam Dates, Application Process, Syllabus, Eligibility Criteria, Prepration Tips and more!Yana Khare07 May, 2025
GATE DA 2025: Eligibility, Important Dates, Syllabus and More
Find out all about GATE DA 2025: Exam Dates, Application Process, Syllabus, Eligibility Criteria, Prepration Tips and more!
CareerGenerative AIIntermediateInterview Prep50+ Generative AI Interview Questions50+ Generative AI interview questions and MCQs covering the basic concepts and advanced technologies to help you ace your GenAI interview!Badrinarayan M01 May, 2025
50+ Generative AI Interview Questions
50+ Generative AI interview questions and MCQs covering the basic concepts and advanced technologies to help you ace your GenAI interview!
Career
Welcome to the world of careers in AI and Data Science! Today, AI and Data Science are at the forefront of innovation, offering a multitude of job opportunities across sectors. If you are one of the many intrigued by the limitless potential of new technologies, then a career in AI and Data Science is probably your calling.
And, now that you are here, you’ve already taken the first step towards getting your dream job! Let us guide you from here to build a successful career in AI and Data Science. Read on to explore exciting learning paths, essential skills, and the various opportunities that AI and Data Science have to offer.
How to Build a Career in Generative AI
Building a career in Generative AI (GenAI) offers exciting opportunities at the forefront of technology and innovation. Its growing impact across industries ranging from content creation and automation to healthcare and finance, makes it a promising career option. As GenAI is becoming an essential tool for businesses worldwide, now would be a great time to start exploring job opportunities in this field.
Resources for Building a Career in GenAI
10+ New Jobs in The Generative AI Era
Top 9 Generative AI Skills You Should Learn
How to Transition Your Career from Non-Tech Field to Generative AI
Learning Path to Become a Prompt Engineering Specialist
Top 10 Skills to Become a Generative AI Expert
Top 10 Free Generative AI Courses
Free Generative AI Course
Top 9 Universities Offering GenAI Certification
Top 11 YouTube Channels to Learn Generative AI
How to Build a Career in AI
“AI will not replace jobs, but it will change the nature of work.” –Kai-Fu Lee
AI is the future! According to a study byDataprot,AI is expected to create 12 million new jobs by 2025.A career in AI not only promises growth and job security, but also gives you the opportunity to shape tomorrow’s technological landscape. So let’s begin your journey into the future of tech!
All About Becoming an AI Engineer
Roadmap to Become an AI Engineer in 2024
8 Must Have Skills to Become an AI Engineer in 2024
AI Engineer Salary in India and Abroad [2024 Edition]
How To Transition from Software Developer to AI Engineer?
Guides to Other AI Job Roles
How to Become an AI Architect in 2024?
How to Become Robotics Engineer?
How to Become an NLP Engineer? Career Roadmap 2024
Resources for Building a Career in AI
Top 7 Artificial Intelligence (AI) Internships for Freshers
Top AI Certifications to Elevate Your Career in 2024
12 AI Courses Per Your Current Requirement and Experience in 2024
9 Free AI Courses from Stanford
10+ Free AI Courses by Google
Top 7 LinkedIn Free AI Courses for Learners
14 Highest-Paying AI Jobs for Freshers in 2024
How to Build a Career in Data Science
As the world is becoming more and more data-driven, there is a growing need for Data Science professionals across industries.Whether it’s uncovering insights from vast datasets, building intelligent algorithms, or creating solutions that transform businesses, they are needed everywhere.Although most Data Science roles are technical, they are also mostly collaborative. Hence, you will require good communication skills and the ability to be a team player, to build your career.
How to Become a Data Scientist?
Learning Path to Become a Data Scientist in 2024
How to Become a Data Scientist After the 12th Standard?
How to Become a Data Scientist After BCom?
How to Become a Data Scientist in 12 Months?
How to Become Amazon Data Scientist in 2024?
Step-by-step Guide to Become a Data Scientist in Retail Industry
How to Become a Data Scientist in USA?
How to Become a Data Strategist in 2024?
Step-by-Step Roadmap to Become a Data Engineer in 2024
How Long Does It Take to Become a Data Scientist?
Top 5 Reasons to Become a Data Scientist
How to Become a Data Analyst?
How to Become a Data Analyst in 2024: A Complete RoadMap
How to Become a Data Analyst With No Experience?
How to Become a Business Intelligence Analyst
How to Become a Data Analyst in the USA?
How to Become a Supply Chain Analyst in 2024?
How To Become A Sports Analyst?
How to Become a Research Analyst?
How to Become a Product Analyst in 2024?
How to Transition into Data Science?
16 Key Questions You Should Answer Before Transitioning into Data Science
How to Successfully Make a Data Science Career Transition – Everything You Need to Know
Ways to Transition into Data Science: Fresh Graduates and Experienced Professionals up to 5 years
8 Thoughts on How to Transition into Data Science from Different Backgrounds
Career Transition From Civil Engineer to Data Scientist
Career Transition From System Engineer to Data Analyst
Planning a late career shift to Analytics / Big data? Better be prepared!
9 Tips for a Seamless Transition to Data Science for Absolute Beginners!
How can a Statistician Become a Data Scientist?
Resources for Building a Career in Data Science
Top 10 In-Demand Data Tech Roles in Data Science
Top 13 Companies Hiring Data Science Freshers in 2024
Top 10 Platforms to Practice Data Science Skills
5 Free Data Analytics Courses to Kickstart Your Career
8 Microsoft Free Courses – Machine Learning, AI, Data Science & More
Top 15 Free Data Science Courses to Kick Start your Data Science Journey
4 Free Certificate Courses in Data Science and Machine Learning
Top 10 Online Data Science Courses in USA
Trending articles
CareerGenerative AI6 Deep Learning Applications a beginner can build in minutes (using Python)Faizan Shaikh19 Apr, 2023
CareerGenerative AI14 Must Have Data Scientist Skills in 2025Nitika Sharma11 Dec, 2024
CareerGenerative AIData Engineer Roadmap for 2025Aniruddha Bhandari01 May, 2025
CareerGenerative AITop 20 Python Certification 2025 (Free and Paid)Nitika Sharma07 Apr, 2025
Flagship Programs
Free Courses
Popular Categories
Generative AI Tools and Techniques
Popular GenAI Models
AI Development Frameworks
Data Science Tools and Techniques
Continue your learning for FREE
Enter email address to continue
Enter OTP sent to
Edit
Enter the OTP
Resend OTP
Resend OTP in45s

[Images saved with this article:]
www.analyticsvidhya.com_blog_category_career__0.webp
www.analyticsvidhya.com_blog_category_career__1.webp
www.analyticsvidhya.com_blog_category_career__2.webp
www.analyticsvidhya.com_blog_category_career__3.webp
www.analyticsvidhya.com_blog_category_career__4.webp
www.analyticsvidhya.com_blog_category_career__5.webp
www.analyticsvidhya.com_blog_category_career__6.webp
www.analyticsvidhya.com_blog_category_career__7.webp
www.analyticsvidhya.com_blog_category_career__8.webp
www.analyticsvidhya.com_blog_category_career__9.webp
www.analyticsvidhya.com_blog_category_career__10.jpg