W3Schools Academy
Articles for Teachers
How TO
Coding and Computer Science Syllabus
Introduction:The W3Schools tutorials are comprehensive and beginner-friendly.
They will give you a fundamental knowledge of different programming languages.
The tutorials are designed for beginners and requires no prior knowledge.
The content has been carefully made to be bite-sized, simple, and easy to understand.
The training materials are proven by millions of users over the years. It is updated and improved frequently.
The syllabus outline and its sequence are structured so you can learn different programming languages step by step.
The pre-made syllabus can be used by you as a teacher teaching coding and computer science.
Learning Outcomes
Learn the fundamentals of your selected programming language
Understand basic computer science concepts
Write and run code in various languages
Work with data types, variables, and functions
Build interactive web applications
Debug and troubleshoot code
Follow programming best practices
Complete hands-on exercises and projects
Test your knowledge with quizzes and assessments
Get certified by passing exams
Note:Are you a teacher teaching coding?W3Schools Academyis a toolbox of features that can help you teach. It offers classroom features such as pre-built study plans, classroom administration and much more. Read more aboutAcademy here.
Study Plans
W3Schools offers study plans to help guide your students. Study plans provide a structured path through the curriculum with:
Step-by-step learning paths
Interactive content and exercises
Flexible timelines and pacing
Progress tracking
Pre-built teacher materials
The study plans are pre-built and can be customized to your needs.
You set the timeline and the pace.
Study plans help ensure you learn concepts in the right order and stay on track to reach your goals.
View Study Plans »
Which Subjects Are Coding and Computer Science Relevant For?
Science and Technology:Learn how computers work and solve problems.
Business and Finance:Create programs to handle data and calculations.
Education:Build learning tools and educational software.
Healthcare:Develop systems to help doctors and patients.
And Much More:Coding skills are useful in many other fields!
Activities
In the different tutorials, we offer different activities for you to learn web development for free:
Lessons
Exercises
Quizzes
Example of activities:
HTML Lessons
HTML Exercises
HTML Quizzes
Sign in to Track Progress
You can also create a free account to track your progress.
As a signed-in user, you get access to features such as:
Learning paths
Sandbox and lab environments
Achievements
And much more!
Sign Up - It's free
Overview of the Syllabus that we offer
Frontend
HTML
CSS
JavaScript
React
Angular
Vue.js
TypeScript
jQuery
Bootstrap
Backend
Python
SQL
PHP
Java
Node.js
Django
MySQL
PostgreSQL
MongoDB
Programming
C++
C#
C
R
Kotlin
Go
DSA
Data Science
NumPy
Pandas
SciPy
Excel
Other
XML
Git
Cybersecurity
Get Started
Sandbox and Lab Environment
Programming languages are best learned through hands-on practice.
Try this Python example using our editor:
Example
If you want to explore more and host your project, we have a feature calledSpacesthat allows you to build, test and run web applications for free.
Here you get a secure sandbox environment called Spaces, where you can practice the most popular code languages and test projects in real-time.
Spaces allow you to test, build, and deploy code. This includes a W3Schools subdomain, hosting, and secure SSL certificates.
Spaces require no installation and run directly in the browser.
Features include:
Collaboration
File navigator
Terminal & log
Package manager
Database
Environment manager
Analytics
Create a Spaces Account
W3Schools Certifications
W3Schools offers an end-of-pathway certification program.
Here, you can take exams to get certified.
The exam is a test that summarizes the W3Schools syllabus for the different programming languages.
After passing the exam you get the "Certified Developer" Certification.
There are two different types of certifications:
Non-adaptive
Adaptive
The non-adaptive is pass or no pass.
The adaptive certification exam is adaptive and graded; students will receive grades from intermediate to advanced to professional.
Here is an example of the HTML certification exam:
Browse Certifications »
W3Schools Courses
W3Schools offers a wide range of courses for different programming languages.
The difference between the course and tutorial is that the course includes the exams and certifications.
It will give you all the training you need to become a certified developer.
We will guide you through the process and help you get certified.
Browse Courses »
Are You a Teacher?
Are you interested in learning how you can useW3Schools Academyto Teach 
Coding and Computer Science?
Watch a demo ofW3Schools Academy. You'll see how it works and discover how it can make teaching programming easier and more engaging.
Watch Demo »
COLOR PICKER
Contact Sales
If you want to use W3Schools services as an educational institution, team or enterprise, send us an e-mail:sales@w3schools.com
Report Error
If you want to report an error, or if you want to make a suggestion, send us an e-mail:help@w3schools.com
Top Tutorials
Top References
Top Examples
Get Certified

[Images saved with this article:]
www.w3schools.com_spaces_dynamicspaces.gif
www.w3schools.com_html_syllabus-exam.png
www.w3schools.com_python_syllabus-webinar.png
www.w3schools.com_images_img_fa_up_300.png
www.w3schools.com_images_colorpicker2000.png