Machine Learning
TensorFlow
Example 1
Example 2
JS Graphics
History
Mathematics
Statistics
Machine Learning
Machine Learningis a subfield ofArtificial intelligence
"Learning machines to imitate human intelligence"
Machine Learning (ML)
Traditional programminguses algorithmsto produce results from data:
Data + Algorithms =Results
Machine learningcreates algorithmsfrom data and results:
Data + Results =Algorithms
Neural Networks (NN)
Neural Networksis:
A programming technique
A method used in machine learning
A software that learns from mistakes
Neural Networksare based on how the human brain works:Neurons are sending messages to each other.
While the neurons are trying to solve a problem (over and over again),
it is strengthening the connections that lead to success and diminishing the connections that lead to failure.
Perceptrons
ThePerceptrondefines the first step into Neural Networks.
It represents a single neuron with only one input layer, and no hidden layers.
Learn how to program a perceptron.
Neural Networks
Neural Networks areMulti-Layer Perceptrons.
In its simplest form, a neural network is made up from:
An input layer (yellow)
A hidden layer (blue)
An output layer (red)
In theNeural Network Model, input data (yellow) are processed against
a hidden layer (blue) before producing the final output (red).
The First Layer:The yellow perceptrons are making simple decisions based on the input.
Each single decision is sent to the perceptrons in the next layer.
The Second Layer:The blue perceptrons are making decisions by weighing
the results from the first layer. This layer make more complex decisions
at a more abstract level than the first layer.
Deep Neural Networks
Deep Neural Networksare made up of several hidden layers of neural networks
that perform complex operations on massive amounts of data.
Each successive layer uses the preceding layer as input.
For instance, optical reading uses low layers to identify edges, and higher 
layers to identify letters.
In theDeep Neural Network Model, input data (yellow) are processed against
a hidden layer (blue) and modified against more hidden layers (green) to produce the final output (red).
The First Layer:The yellow perceptrons are making simple decisions based on the input.
Each single decision is sent to the perceptrons in the next layer.
The Second Layer:The blue perceptrons are making decisions by weighing
the results from the first layer. This layer make more complex decisions
at a more abstract level than the first layer.
The Third Layer:Even more complex decisions are made by the green perceptrons.
Deep Learning (DL)
Deep Learningis a subset of Machine Learning.
Deep Learning is responsible for the AI boom of the last years.
Deep learning is an advanced type of ML that handles complex tasks like image recognition.
Machine Learning
Deep Learning
A subset of AI
A subset of Machine Learning
Uses smaller data sets
Uses larger datasets
Trained by humans
Learns on its own
Creates simple algorithms
Creates complex algorithms
COLOR PICKER
Contact Sales
If you want to use W3Schools services as an educational institution, team or enterprise, send us an e-mail:sales@w3schools.com
Report Error
If you want to report an error, or if you want to make a suggestion, send us an e-mail:help@w3schools.com
Top Tutorials
Top References
Top Examples
Get Certified

[Images saved with this article:]
www.w3schools.com_ai_img_brain_600.jpg
www.w3schools.com_ai_img_dl_nn_600.jpg
www.w3schools.com_ai_img_perceptron.jpg
www.w3schools.com_ai_img_nn_single_600.jpg
www.w3schools.com_ai_img_neural_networks.jpg
www.w3schools.com_images_img_fa_up_300.png
www.w3schools.com_images_colorpicker2000.png