Cloud Computing Basics
Cloud Computing - Home
Cloud Computing - Overview
Cloud Computing - Evolution
Cloud Computing - Characteristics
Cloud Computing - Advantages
Cloud Computing - Planning
Cloud Computing - Technologies
Cloud Computing - Architecture
Cloud Computing - Infrastructure
Cloud Deployment Models
Public Cloud Model
Private Cloud Model
Hybrid Cloud Model
Community Cloud Model
Cloud Service Models
Infrastructure Service
Platform Service
Software ervice
Identity Service
Network Service
IaaS, PaaS, and SaaS
Cloud Virtualization
Cloud Computing Virtualization
Server Virtualization
Data Virtualization
Software Virtualization
Storage Virtualization
Network Virtualization
Linux Virtualization
Cloud Advanced Concepts
Cloud Computing - Management
Cloud Computing - Data Storage
Cloud Computing - Security
Cloud Computing - Operation
Cloud Computing - Applications
Cloud Computing - Providers
Cloud Computing - Challenges
Cloud Computing - Mobile
Google Cloud Platform
Cloud Computing - Multitenancy
Hypervisor Security
Cloud Computing - Principles
Security Architecture
Fault Tolerance
Cloud Computing - Resiliency
Service Level Agreements
Cloud Networking
Server Consolidation
Cloud Computing - Scaling
Autoscaling vs Load Balancer
Scalability and Elasticity
Cloud Bursting vs Cloud Scaling
Resource Pooling
Load Balancing
Security Threats in Implementation  SaaS
Cloud Computing - Data Center
Cloud Computing - Aneka
Cloud Computing - Rapid Elasticity
Cloud Computing - Xaas
Cloud Computing - DaaS
Cloud Computing - CaaS
Cloud Computing - Roots
Cloud Hosting vs Web Hosting
Colocation vs Cloud
iCloud Drive vs Dropbox
SAP vs Oracle Cloud
Cloud Computing vs Data Science
Cloud Integration Platform
Onedrive and iCloud
Private Cloud and On-premise
What is Cloudcraft
Bitbucket Cloud API
Akamai vs Cloudflare
AWS CloudWatch vs Datadog
Cloud Burst
Cloudflare vs CloudFront
Elastic Cloud on Azure
Cloud Useful Resources
Cloud Computing - Quick Guide
Cloud Computing - Useful Resources
Cloud Computing - Discussion
Selected Reading
UPSC IAS Exams Notes
Developer's Best Practices
Questions and Answers
Effective Resume Writing
AI Based Resume Builder
Personal AI Study Assistant
Generate Coding Logic
HR Interview Questions
Computer Glossary
Who is Who
Cloud Computing Tutorial
Cloud Computing provides us means by which we can access the applications as utilities over the internet. It allows us to create, configure, and customize the business applications online.
This tutorial will take you through a step-by-step approach while learning Cloud Computing concepts.
What is Cloud Computing?
Cloud computing is a way for providing computing resources over internet. The computing resources include physical orvirtual servers, data storage, networking capabilities, application development tools, software, analytic platforms and more.
The termcloudin cloud computing refers tointernet. When we use cloud services, we are basically accessing remote servers, powerful mainframe computers housed in large data centers, through the internet. The cloud computing model gives users, greater flexibility and scalability compared to traditional on-premises infrastructure.
Benefits of Cloud Computing
The cloud computing provides several benefits such flexibility and reliability, increased performance and efficiency, and lower IT costs, when compared to on-premises compute resources. In on-premises, the company owns and maintains physical data centers and servers. Lets discuss some benefits as follows −
Cost Savings− organizations can rent computing resources on-demand instead of buying expensive physical servers.  You can choose any cloud service model and you only pay for the resources you actually use.
Scalability− organizations can quickly scale up and scale down their compute resources to meet the changing demands. The benefits of cloud computing services include the ability to scale elastically.
Performance− Cloud computing offers greater performance by reducing the network latency for applications.
Reliability− Cloud computing makes data backup, disaster recovery easier and less expensive.
Productivity− On-premises datacenters typically require a lot of hardware and software setup, other time-consuming IT management chores. Cloud computing removes the need for many of these tasks, improving the performance of IT teams.
Security− Cloud computing providers offers security for your data, applications, etc., from potential threats.
Types of Cloud Computing
There are mainly four types of cloud computing models −
Public Cloud Model
Private Cloud Model
Hybrid Cloud Model
Community Cloud Model
These models are used to deploy cloud services. Within these deployment models, there are mainly four cloud services: software as a service (SaaS), platform as a service (PaaS), infrastructure as a service (IaaS) and serverless computing.
Why to Learn Cloud Computing?
Cloud Computing is one of the growing technologies, that offers many benefits to the businesses. As an employee, a career in cloud computing is also equally beneficial for you. Learning cloud computing would help build a career in a field that is high in demand. It opens up to various job opportunities and helps you stay intent with evolving technologies.
There is high demand for cloud engineers as more and more organizations come to rely on cloud computing technology. There are many career paths along with cloud engineer, such as cloud architect, cloud administrator, cloud security specialist, etc.
Who Should Learn Cloud Computing
This reference has been prepared for the beginners to help them to understand basic-to-advanced concepts related to Cloud Computing. This tutorial will give you enough understanding on Cloud Computing concepts from where you can take yourself to a higher level of expertise.
Prerequisites to Learn Cloud Computing
Before proceeding with this tutorial, you should have basic knowledge of Computers, Internet, Database and Networking concepts. Such basic knowledge will help you in understanding the Cloud Computing concepts and move fast on the learning track.
FAQs on Cloud Computing
In this section, we have collected a set ofFrequently Asked Questions(FAQs) onCloud Computingfollowed by their answers −
1. What is scalability in cloud computing?
In cloud computing, the scalability is referred as the cloud systems ability to increase or decrease IT or compute resources as needed. When the demand for the compute resources increase or decrease, the cloud computing infrastructure should be able to handle these fluctuations.
2. What is elasticity in cloud computing?
Elasticity in cloud computing refers to the ability of cloud computing system to automatically adjust the changing demands. This is done by adding or removing the cloud compute resources such as memory, storage, and processing power.
3. What are cloud delivery models?
Cloud delivery models are ways to provide cloud services to end users. These models include type of cloud and service model. The type of cloud includes public, private and hybrid, and service model includes Software as a Service (SaaS), Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS), etc.
4. What is cloud storage?
Cloud storage is mode of data storage in which data is stored on remote servers. These servers are managed by a third party provider who is responsible for managing and securing data stored on its infrastructure.
5. What is API gateway?
API gateway is an API management tool that provides management, monitoring, and authentication for your APIs. An API gateway enables several APIs to work together as a single gateway to provide a consistent user experience.
6. What are computing resources?
Compute resources in cloud computing can refer to hardware and software such storage, processing power, databases, networking, analytics, artificial intelligence, and software applications. The main goal of cloud computing is to provide these resources over the internet (cloud).
7. What is IT infrastructure?
TheIT infrastructurein cloud computing is collection of the hardware and software that are needed to enable cloud computing services. This includes computing power, networking, storage, and virtualization resources.
8. What is Virtualization?
Virtualizationin cloud computing is a technique that allows for more efficient use of physical computer hardware and is the foundation of cloud computing. It creates virtual versions of physical hardware, networks, and storage.
9. What is hypervisor in cloud computing?
A hypervisor is a software that you can use to run multiple virtual machines (VMs) on a single physical machine. Every virtual machine has its own operating system and applications.
10. What is a virtual machine in cloud computing?
A virtual machine is computing environment that functions as an actual computer system with its own CPU, memory, storage and, network interface.
11. What is a container?
In cloud computing, a container is a lightweight package of software that contains all necessary components, such as files, libraries and environment variables, to run in any environment.