Master Generative AI with 10+ Real-world Projects in 2025!
d
h
m
s
Reading list
Top 10 blogs on NLP in Analytics Vidhya 2022
Introduction
Natural language processing (NLP) is a field of computer science and artificial intelligence that focuses on the interaction between computers and human (natural) languages. It involves developing algorithms and models to analyze, understand, and generate human language, enabling computers to perform sentiment analysis, language translation, text summarization, and tasks.
Natural language processing (NLP) is one of the most exciting areas of artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML). According to Mordor Intelligence, the global NLP industry is expected to be worthUS$42.04 billion by 2026, with aCAGR of 21.5%.
This article will discuss the top 10 articles in the field of NLP, highlighting their critical contributions and impact. These articles cover various topics, from deep learning approaches for NLP to developing and deploying NLP systems. Whether you are a researcher, engineer, or simply interested in the latest developments in NLP, these articles provide a valuable resource for staying up-to-date on the latest research and applications.
Below listed are the top NLP blogs published on Analytics Vidhya. So, let’s start digging.
1. Keyword Extraction Methods from Documents in NLP
Keyword extractionis commonly used to extract meaningful information from paragraphs or documents. It is an automated process of extracting the most relevant words and phrases from text input. Keyword extraction can sift through the data and find the terms that best define each review. This article byPradeep Twill show you how to extract keywords from documents using natural language processing tools like Rake, spacy, textrank, etc.
If you are interested in learning these keyword extraction methods, this article is for you.
Tools:Python
Method:Extracting keywords using Rake_NLTK, Spacy, Textrank, Word cloud, KeyBert, Yake, MonkeyLearn API, Textrazor API
Level:Intermediate
2. Four of the easiest and most effective methods to Extract Keywords from a Single Text using Python
The article by Ali Mansour presents four cutting-edge techniques forextracting keywords/keyphrases and code implementationsfor each. Each of them successfully extracted keywords that are either similar to the author’s keywords or close to them and related to the field. In the future, we will present a novel new for automating keyword extraction, and its performance will be compared to the formerly mentioned baselines and many others.
Tools:Python
Method:Vectorization of text
Level:Beginner
3. Speech-to-Text Conversion in Python – A Step-by-Step Tutorial
If you are looking for astep-by-step guide for converting speech to textthrough python, this article byPrashant Sharmais for you.
Throughout the history of computers, the text has been the primary input type. However, thanks to NLP and ML Data Science advancements, we will soon be able to use speech as a medium for interacting with our gadgets. For the first time in modern technology history, the ability to convert spoken words into text is freely available to anyone who wishes to experiment. Python, one of the most popular programming languages, provides many options for developing speech-to-text applications.
Tools:Python
Method:Speech-to-text conversion
Level:Advanced
4. Stemming vs. Lemmatization in NLP: Must-Know Differences
In this article bySaumya Bansal, you will learn about text Normalization techniques used in Natural Language Processing, i.e.,lemmatization and stemming. Inflected Language is another term for a language with derived words. For example, the word “historical” is derived from the word “history,” and thus is a derived word. Furthermore, the degree of inflection varies from low to high depending on the language.
If you are confused about using stemming or lemmatization for text normalization, this article will help you choose the best fit.
Tools:Python
Method:Stemming and Lemmatization
Level:Beginner
5. Sentiment Analysis UsingPython
This article bySuvrat Aroraexplores whatsentiment analysis encompasses and the various ways to implement it in Python. Sentiment Analysis is a Natural Language Processing (NLP) use case that falls under text classification.Sentiment Analysiscategorizes a text as positive or negative, happy, sad, neutral, etc. Thus, the ultimate goal of sentiment analysis is to determine a text’s underlying mood, emotion, or sentiment.
Further, the article covers various use cases of sentiment analysis and how python offers a multitude of ways to perform sentiment analysis.
Tools:Python
Method:Sentiment Analysis
Level:Beginner
6. NLP Tutorials Part -I from Basics to Advance
The article byAbhishek Jaiswaldiscusses various techniques for preprocessing textual data. Following data cleaning, it explains how to conduct exploratory data analysis with a word cloud and generate word frequency. If you want to learn more about the basics and advancedprocesses associated with NLP, then this is the perfect read for you.
Tools:Python
Method:Textual data preprocessing
Level:Beginner
7. Decision Tree Machine Learning Algorithm Using Python
This article byAmrutha Ktalks about theDecision Tree Machine Learning algorithm. A Decision Tree is a supervised machine learning algorithm in which all decisions are based on certain conditions. The decision tree has a root node and leaf nodes that branch out from it. These nodes were chosen based on parameters like the Gini index, entropy, and information gain.
Read the article to learn more about decision tree algorithms.
Tools:Python
Method:Decision tree
Level:Intermediate
8. Tutorial on RNN | LSTM |GRU with Implementation
In NLP, we have seen some NLP tasks using traditional neural networks, like text classification and sentiment analysis. This article byAbhishek Jaiswalcovers the problem with NLP and how to solve these problems through the hidden layers of RNN. Hidden layers helpRNNto remember the sequence of words and use the sequence pattern for the prediction.
Tools:Python
Method:RNN, LSTM, Bidirectional LSTM, and GRU
Level:Beginner
9. Roadmap to Master NLP in 2022
If you have been looking to learn andmaster NLP, then this article byChirag Goyalis the perfect one.The article quickly snowballed into a detailed explanation of the pedagogical approach implied by the author and how he transitioned from a Mechanical Engineering nerd to a Natural Language Processing enthusiast.
Natural Language Processing is the area of research in Artificial Intelligence that mainly focuses on processing and using text and speech data to create intelligent machines and insights from the data.
The article further discussesall the resources to learn the NLP-related topics mentioned. If this interests you, give a thorough reading of the article.
Tools:Python
Method:Natural language processing
Level:Beginner
10. Text Data Augmentation in Natural Language Processing with Texattack
This article byPriya Tidkediscusses data augmentation, where, and how to use it.
Data Augmentation is a process that enables us to artificially increase training data size by generating different versions of real datasets without collecting the data. Its strategy is used in computer Vision and Natural Language Processing dealing with data scarcity and insufficient data diversity. It is relatively easy to create augmented images, but with NLP, it is not the same due to the complexities inherent in the language. The distribution of augmented data generated should neither be too similar nor too different from the original.
While Data Augmentation techniques are used in Computer Vision and NLP, this tutorial focuses on using Data augmentation in NLP throughTextAttack library.
To get more information about methods under TextAttack libraries, read ot blog from the link above.
Tools:Textattact
Method:Data Augmentation
Level:Advanced
Conclusion
Evolving technology is assisting in developing more innovative NLP systems that are more dynamic and mature in their functional and operational capabilities. The above listed are the ten blogs that would play a critical role in shaping the future of NLP systems and help the industry to make giant strides in its appeal. These blogs are precisely what you are looking for if you want to learn more about NLP and its concepts.
So, spend these winter vacations learning from the best of our resources and mastering the art of NLP. We will see you in 2023 with more learnings from undiscovered topics.
Did this article give you an in-depth analysis of NLP and its tools & techniques? If yes, subscribe to us for some fantastic data science content, and you can leave a comment to help us know which article you would like us to cover further.
Happy Reading!
A highly motivated Content Writer with knowledge of blogging, copywriting, SEO, and content framework creation. I am familiar with basic knowledge of analyzing blog traffic and deriving actionable insights.
Login to continue reading and enjoy expert-curated content.
Free Courses
Generative AI - A Way of Life
Explore Generative AI for beginners: create text and images, use top AI tools, learn practical skills, and ethics.
Getting Started with Large Language Models
Master Large Language Models (LLMs) with this course, offering clear guidance in NLP and model training made simple.
Building LLM Applications using Prompt Engineering
This free course guides you on building LLM apps, mastering prompt engineering, and developing chatbots with enterprise data.
Improving Real World RAG Systems: Key Challenges & Practical Solutions
Explore practical solutions, advanced retrieval strategies, and agentic RAG systems to improve context, relevance, and accuracy in AI-driven applications.
Microsoft Excel: Formulas & Functions
Master MS Excel for data analysis with key formulas, functions, and LookUp tools in this comprehensive course.
Recommended Articles
Sentiment Analysis Using Python
Sentiment Analysis Using Python
What Are N-Grams and How to Implement Them in P...
What Are N-Grams and How to Implement Them in P...
Master Natural Language Processing in 2025 with...
Master Natural Language Processing in 2025 with...
Ultimate Guide to Understand and Implement Natu...
Ultimate Guide to Understand and Implement Natu...
7 NLP Books Every Data Scientist Must Read
7 NLP Books Every Data Scientist Must Read
Natural Language Processing: Step by Step Guide
Natural Language Processing: Step by Step Guide
Part 8: Step by Step Guide to Master NLP –...
Part 8: Step by Step Guide to Master NLP –...
Top 8 Python Libraries For Natural Language Pro...
Top 8 Python Libraries For Natural Language Pro...
Top 10 NLP Interview Questions and Answers in 2025
Top 10 NLP Interview Questions and Answers in 2025
Top Best 15 NLP Projects
Top Best 15 NLP Projects
Responses From Readers
Write for us
Write, captivate, and earn accolades and rewards for your work
Reach a Global Audience
Get Expert Feedback
Build Your Brand & Audience
Cash In on Your Knowledge
Join a Thriving Community
Level Up Your Data Science Game
Flagship Programs
Free Courses
Popular Categories
Generative AI Tools and Techniques
Popular GenAI Models
AI Development Frameworks
Data Science Tools and Techniques
Continue your learning for FREE
Enter email address to continue
Enter OTP sent to
Edit
Enter the OTP
Resend OTP
Resend OTP in45s

[Images saved with this article:]
www.analyticsvidhya.com_blog_2022_12_top-10-blogs-on-nlp-in-analytics-vidhya-2022__0.webp
www.analyticsvidhya.com_blog_2022_12_top-10-blogs-on-nlp-in-analytics-vidhya-2022__1.jpeg
www.analyticsvidhya.com_blog_2022_12_top-10-blogs-on-nlp-in-analytics-vidhya-2022__2.JPG
www.analyticsvidhya.com_blog_2022_12_top-10-blogs-on-nlp-in-analytics-vidhya-2022__3.png
www.analyticsvidhya.com_blog_2022_12_top-10-blogs-on-nlp-in-analytics-vidhya-2022__4.webp
www.analyticsvidhya.com_blog_2022_12_top-10-blogs-on-nlp-in-analytics-vidhya-2022__5.webp
www.analyticsvidhya.com_blog_2022_12_top-10-blogs-on-nlp-in-analytics-vidhya-2022__6.webp
www.analyticsvidhya.com_blog_2022_12_top-10-blogs-on-nlp-in-analytics-vidhya-2022__7.webp
www.analyticsvidhya.com_blog_2022_12_top-10-blogs-on-nlp-in-analytics-vidhya-2022__8.webp
www.analyticsvidhya.com_blog_2022_12_top-10-blogs-on-nlp-in-analytics-vidhya-2022__9.webp
www.analyticsvidhya.com_blog_2022_12_top-10-blogs-on-nlp-in-analytics-vidhya-2022__10.webp