VueTutorial
ScalingUp
Vue Reference
Vue Examples
VueTutorial
Learn Vue
Vue is a popular JavaScript framework.
User interfaces built in Vue updates automatically when data changes.
Vue is easy to learn.
This Tutorial
This tutorial is specially designed to help you learn Vue as quickly and efficiently as possible.
First, you will learn the basics of Vue: text interpolation, directives, and how to incorporate events and forms into your project.
Then you will learn everything else you need to know about Vue:
Computed properties, watchers, methods, setup for Single-File Components (SFCs, *.vue files), and more.
Try it Yourself Examples in Every Chapter
In every chapter, you can edit the examples online, and click on a button to view the result.
Example
What You Should Already Know
Before you study Vue, you should have a basic understanding of:
HTML
CSS
JavaScript
Vue History
Evan You, a Google employee using AngularJS, started to develop Vue in 2013.
Vue version 1.0 was released in 2015.
Vue Exercises
Vue Quiz ?
Learn by taking a quiz! The quiz will give you a signal of how much you know about Vue.
Start Vue Quiz
Track Your Progress
Create a free W3Schools account and get access to more features and learning materials:
View your completed tutorials, exercises, and quizzes
Keep an eye on your progress and daily streaks
Set goals and create learning paths
Create your own personal website
Sign Up for Free
Note:This is an optional feature. You can study at W3Schools without creating an account.
Learn by Examples
Learn by examples! This tutorial supplements all explanations with clarifying examples.
See All Vue Examples
COLOR PICKER
Contact Sales
If you want to use W3Schools services as an educational institution, team or enterprise, send us an e-mail:sales@w3schools.com
Report Error
If you want to report an error, or if you want to make a suggestion, send us an e-mail:help@w3schools.com
Top Tutorials
Top References
Top Examples
Get Certified

[Images saved with this article:]
www.w3schools.com_images_img_fa_up_300.png
www.w3schools.com_images_colorpicker2000.png