HTML Tutorial
HTML Exercises
HTML Tags
HTML Attributes
Global Attributes
Event Attributes
HTML Interview Questions
HTML DOM
DOM Audio/Video
HTML 5
HTML Examples
Color Picker
A to Z Guide
HTML Formatter
Explore GfG Courses
Share Your Experiences
HTML Tutorial
HTML Introduction
HTML Editors
HTML Basics
HTML Comments
HTML Elements
HTML Attributes
HTML Headings
HTML Paragraphs
HTML Text Formatting
HTML Quotations
HTML Colors
HTML Links Hyperlinks
HTML Images
HTML Favicon
HTML Tables
HTML List
HTML Lists
HTML Ordered Lists
HTML Unordered Lists
HTML Description Lists
HTML Block and Inline Elements
HTML Iframes
HTML File Paths
HTML Layout
HTML Computer Code Elements
HTML5 Semantics
HTML Entities
HTML Symbols
HTML Emojis
HTML Charsets
HTML URL Encoding
HTML Forms
HTML Responsive Web Design
HTML Video
HTML Examples
HTML Graphics
SVG Tutorial
HTML Tutorial References
HTML Tags - A to Z List
HTML Attributes Complete Reference
HTML Global Attributes
HTML5 Complete Reference
HTML5 MathML Complete Reference
HTML DOM Complete Reference
HTML DOM Audio/Video Complete Reference
SVG Element Complete Reference
SVG Attribute Complete Reference
SVG Property Complete Reference
HTML Canvas Complete Reference
HTML Exercises, Practice Questions and Solutions
Full Stack DevelopmentCourse
HTML TutorialLast Updated :17 May, 2025CommentsImproveSuggest changesLike ArticleLikeReportHTMLstands forHyperText Markup Language. It is the standard language used to create and structure content on the web. It tells the web browser how to display text, links, images, and other forms of multimedia on a webpage. HTML sets up the basic structure of a website, and then CSS and JavaScript add style and interactivity to make it look and function better.How Does HTML Work? - HTML documents are plain-text files saved with an.html extension. Browsers read these documents, interpret the markup (tags and attributes), and render the formatted content on your screen.To know more about HTML features, history, advantages, etc. - refer toHTML Introduction.'Hello World' Page in HTMLTo show youhow fun and easy HTML is, we have provided a classic example ofwriting "Hello, World!" in HTMLHTML<!DOCTYPE html><html><head><title>Page Title</title></head><body><p>Hello World</p></body></html>Why Learn HTML?Learning HTML is essential for various practical reasons:Foundation of Web Development:HTML is the starting point for creating websites. Understanding HTML is crucial for any web development or web design role.Universal Language of the Web:HTML is the standard markup language used to create the structure of web pages. Knowledge of HTML is necessary to manage any content on the Internet.Easy to Learn:HTML is straightforward compared to programming languages. Beginners can quickly learn how to create basic websites with just HTML.Career Opportunities:Proficiency in HTML opens up various career paths, including web developer, content manager, and UX/UI designer roles.Gateway to Advanced Technologies:Once you master HTML, you can easily move on to learnCSS,JavaScript, and other tools that enhance websites, making them more interactive and visually appealing.Getting Started with HTML: A Beginner’s GuideThisHTML tutorialprovides you with a step-by-step learning journey for mastering HTML. You will start with HTML fundamentals, and then move on to advanced HTML5 topics. By the end of this HTML tutorial, you will have a solid foundation in HTML.1. HTML BasicsBy learning the basics of HTML, you can start creating your own web pages and bring your ideas to life online.Introduction to HTMLHTML EditorsHTML CommentsHTML ElementHTML AttributesHTML DoctypesHTML HeadingHTML ParagraphsHTML LinksHTML ImagesHTML SemanticsHTML EntitiesHTML Symbols2. HTML Beginner ProjectsStart simple and learn by doing beginner HTML projects that teach you how to make basic web pages, giving you real-world practice in building websites.Simple Portfolio WebsiteDesign an Event Web PageTop 10 Projects For Beginners3. HTML Basic Tag QuestionsHTML tags are the building blocks of web pages. By understanding and using HTML tags effectively, you can create well-structured and informative webpages.Add a Paragraph in HTMLCreate a Link in HTMLDiv Tag in HTMLSpan Tag in HTMLAdd a Header on a WebpageAdd a Footer on a WebpageLine Break in HTMLAdd Bavigation Bar in HTMLLink JavaScript to HTMLHTML Tags – A to Z List4. HTML TablesHTML tables provide a structured way to organize information into rows and columns, making it easy for users to understand and navigate.What is a Table in HTML?Add a Table Row in HTMLAdd a Table Header in HTMLAdd a Table Cell in HTMLSet captions in HTML TableGroup Columns in HTML5. HTML ListsHTML lists organize information clearly on your website. They're perfect for step-by-step instructions, lists of ingredients, or ranking items. This improves readability and helps users to understand your content.Lists in HTMLOrdered lists in HTMLUnordered List in in HTMLDescription Lists in HTML6. HTML FormattingHTML offers tags and attributes to style your website's text, images, and more. This improves visual appeal, helps users navigate your content, and signals important information to users. Let's explore some of the common HTML formatting tags.Make Text Italic in HTMLCreate Small text in HTMLMark Text in HTMLAdd a Subscript in HTMLStrong Tag in HTMLBold Text in HTMLHighlight Text in HTMLShow a Deleted Text in HTMLHow to Emphasize Text in HTMLAdd a Superscript in HTML7. HTML FormHTML forms let users interact with your website. Use them to collect contact details, run surveys, search your site, and more. Let's explore more about HTML form:What is a Form in HTML?Add an Input Field in HTMLLabel tag in HTMLAdd a Button in HTMLAdd a Dropdown in HTMLAdd a Textarea in HTMLFieldset Tag in HTMLLegend Tag in HTMLDatalist Tag in HTML8. HTML Advanced ConceptsBeyond the Basics in HTML there are also advance concept exists. So, once you have mastered the fundamental building blocks of HTML, we can explore advanced HTML concepts for dynamic, interactive, and meaningful web pages.iframe in HTMLFile PathsFaviconComputer Code ElementsAdd Emojis in HTMLCharsets in HTMLURL Encoding in HTMLResponsive Web DesignHTML Layout9. HTML Media ElementsAdd Audio to a WebpageAdd video to a Webpage10. HTML ReferencesHTML references are essential resources that provide comprehensive information and guidance on the building blocks of webpages. They're perfect for both experienced developers and those just starting out.Tags ReferenceAttributes ReferenceGlobal Attributes ReferenceEvent Attributes ReferenceDOM ReferenceDOM Audio/Videos ReferenceHTML5 Reference11. Interesting Facts in HTMLHere are some Interesting facts and features that highlight the importance of HTML in web development and how it shapes the structure of web pages:Interesting Facts about HTMLInteresting Facts About HTML Links and NavigationInteresting Facts About HTML TablesInteresting Facts About HTML ListsInteresting Facts About  HTML Meta Tags and SEOInteresting Facts About  HTML5 APIs12. HTML MiscellaneousThis HTML tutorial goes beyond the basics! Explore miscellaneous tags and elements to add comments, help search engines, embed multimedia, design forms, use hex color codes, and define specialized content areas.Structure of HTML DocumentDesign a web pageMost commonly used HTML tagsHTML Form DesignDesign your First Website in Just 1 WeekSimple Portfolio Website DesignDesign a Portfolio Gallery10 Best HTML Coding Practices You Must KnowDesign a Login Form to an Image using HTMLHTML Tutorial - PrerequisitesThisHTML tutorialis perfect for beginners! No prior knowledge is needed, but basic computer skills will help you to get started. After completing this tutorial, you'll have a basic understanding of HTML and be ready for the next stage of web development, CSS.Best Approach to Learn HTMLYou can complete this HTML tutorial in approximately 4 weeks if you dedicate consistent time and effort.Week 1:Cover the fundamentals of HTML, including document structure, elements, attributes, comments, and basic tags like headings, paragraphs, and links.Week 2:Learn to use HTML editors and tools, and work on beginner projects like a simple portfolio or event webpage, applying your knowledge of HTML tags.Week 3: Focus on HTML tables, lists, and forms. Learn to organize data and create input fields, text areas, and buttons for user interaction.Week 4:Explore advanced HTML5 features, responsive web design, and complete a final project to integrate everything you've learned.By the end of 4 weeks, you'll be proficient in HTML and able to build dynamic and responsive web pages.This approach will help you progressively build your HTML skills from fundamental to advanced levels, making you a HTML developer and ready for learning CSS and JS.HTML Online QuizNow, To get the mastery in HTML test your knowledge and sharpen your problem-solving skills with HTML quizzes. The below linked quiz can easily enhance your logical skills and problem solving skills.HTML Exercise – Quiz Set 1HTML Exercise – Quiz Set 2HTML Interview QuestionsHTML Interview Questions for Beginners (2025)HTML Intermediate Interview Questions and Answers (2025)HTML Interview Questions For Experienced (2025)HTML CheatSheetHTML Cheat Sheetis a simple, and quick reference list of basic HTML elements and attributes. The purpose of this Cheat Sheet is to provide you with some quick accurate ready-to-use code snippets and necessary HTML tags and attributes.HTML ProjectsWhether you’re a beginner or looking to refine your HTML knowledge, creating projects like a personal portfolio, a basic landing page, or a responsive website can help you understand HTML in a more effective way. Engaging in such projects not only boosts your confidence but also adds value to your web development portfolio.10 HTML Project Ideas & Topics For BeginnersTop 10 Projects For Beginners To Practice HTML and CSS SkillsApplications of HTMLHTML (HyperText Markup Language) is versatile in web development, with various practical applications:Website Development:HTML forms the structure of websites, organizing content like text, images, and links for easy navigation.Web Applications:HTML5 enables dynamic forms, multimedia handling, and interactive user experiences directly in browsers.Email Templates:HTML helps create visually appealing, responsive email templates that adapt to different devices.Game Development:HTML5, paired with JavaScript, allows the creation of simple, lightweight browser games.Online Learning & Documentation:HTML structures educational content, making online resources easy to read and navigate.Embedding Content: HTML simplifies embedding videos, maps, and social media feeds into web pages.Careers with HTML in 2025HTML is the most fundamental technology used for web development. Though expecting a high-paying job with just HTML knowledge can be challenging - if you want to build a successful career, you need to learn additional technologies also. For web development, you should also know CSS, JavaScript, and either a full-stack or front-end framework based on your interests.That said, there are jobs that require only HTML skills. Here are some examples:Web Content Editor: Creates and manages website content using HTML.Email Developer: Designs and codes HTML emails for marketing campaigns.Landing Page Designer: Builds landing pages to boost marketing conversions.SEO Specialist: Optimizes website content using HTML for better search engine ranking.HTML Email Tester: Tests HTML emails to ensure they display correctly on different devices.Technical Writer: Writes documentation that may need basic HTML knowledge for web publishing.Geek Tip:While HTML is a great starting point, learning more skills will improve your job prospects and salary.Next ArticleHTML IntroductionkartikImproveArticle Tags :Web TechnologiesHTMLTutorialsWeb-Tech Tutorials
HTML Tutorial
HTMLstands forHyperText Markup Language. It is the standard language used to create and structure content on the web. It tells the web browser how to display text, links, images, and other forms of multimedia on a webpage. HTML sets up the basic structure of a website, and then CSS and JavaScript add style and interactivity to make it look and function better.
How Does HTML Work? - HTML documents are plain-text files saved with an.html extension. Browsers read these documents, interpret the markup (tags and attributes), and render the formatted content on your screen.
To know more about HTML features, history, advantages, etc. - refer toHTML Introduction.
'Hello World' Page in HTML
To show youhow fun and easy HTML is, we have provided a classic example ofwriting "Hello, World!" in HTML
<!DOCTYPE html><html><head><title>Page Title</title></head><body><p>Hello World</p></body></html>
<!DOCTYPE html><html><head><title>Page Title</title></head><body><p>Hello World</p></body></html>
Why Learn HTML?
Learning HTML is essential for various practical reasons:
Foundation of Web Development:HTML is the starting point for creating websites. Understanding HTML is crucial for any web development or web design role.
Universal Language of the Web:HTML is the standard markup language used to create the structure of web pages. Knowledge of HTML is necessary to manage any content on the Internet.
Easy to Learn:HTML is straightforward compared to programming languages. Beginners can quickly learn how to create basic websites with just HTML.
Career Opportunities:Proficiency in HTML opens up various career paths, including web developer, content manager, and UX/UI designer roles.
Gateway to Advanced Technologies:Once you master HTML, you can easily move on to learnCSS,JavaScript, and other tools that enhance websites, making them more interactive and visually appealing.
Getting Started with HTML: A Beginner’s Guide
ThisHTML tutorialprovides you with a step-by-step learning journey for mastering HTML. You will start with HTML fundamentals, and then move on to advanced HTML5 topics. By the end of this HTML tutorial, you will have a solid foundation in HTML.
1. HTML Basics
By learning the basics of HTML, you can start creating your own web pages and bring your ideas to life online.
Introduction to HTML
HTML Editors
HTML Comments
HTML Element
HTML Attributes
HTML Doctypes
HTML Heading
HTML Paragraphs
HTML Links
HTML Images
HTML Semantics
HTML Entities
HTML Symbols
2. HTML Beginner Projects
Start simple and learn by doing beginner HTML projects that teach you how to make basic web pages, giving you real-world practice in building websites.
Simple Portfolio Website
Design an Event Web Page
Top 10 Projects For Beginners
3. HTML Basic Tag Questions
HTML tags are the building blocks of web pages. By understanding and using HTML tags effectively, you can create well-structured and informative webpages.
Add a Paragraph in HTML
Create a Link in HTML
Div Tag in HTML
Span Tag in HTML
Add a Header on a Webpage
Add a Footer on a Webpage
Line Break in HTML
Add Bavigation Bar in HTML
Link JavaScript to HTML
HTML Tags – A to Z List
4. HTML Tables
HTML tables provide a structured way to organize information into rows and columns, making it easy for users to understand and navigate.
What is a Table in HTML?
Add a Table Row in HTML
Add a Table Header in HTML
Add a Table Cell in HTML
Set captions in HTML Table
Group Columns in HTML
5. HTML Lists
HTML lists organize information clearly on your website. They're perfect for step-by-step instructions, lists of ingredients, or ranking items. This improves readability and helps users to understand your content.
Lists in HTML
Ordered lists in HTML
Unordered List in in HTML
Description Lists in HTML
6. HTML Formatting
HTML offers tags and attributes to style your website's text, images, and more. This improves visual appeal, helps users navigate your content, and signals important information to users. Let's explore some of the common HTML formatting tags.
Make Text Italic in HTML
Create Small text in HTML
Mark Text in HTML
Add a Subscript in HTML
Strong Tag in HTML
Bold Text in HTML
Highlight Text in HTML
Show a Deleted Text in HTML
How to Emphasize Text in HTML
Add a Superscript in HTML
7. HTML Form
HTML forms let users interact with your website. Use them to collect contact details, run surveys, search your site, and more. Let's explore more about HTML form:
What is a Form in HTML?
Add an Input Field in HTML
Label tag in HTML
Add a Button in HTML
Add a Dropdown in HTML
Add a Textarea in HTML
Fieldset Tag in HTML
Legend Tag in HTML
Datalist Tag in HTML
8. HTML Advanced Concepts
Beyond the Basics in HTML there are also advance concept exists. So, once you have mastered the fundamental building blocks of HTML, we can explore advanced HTML concepts for dynamic, interactive, and meaningful web pages.
iframe in HTML
File Paths
Favicon
Computer Code Elements
Add Emojis in HTML
Charsets in HTML
URL Encoding in HTML
Responsive Web Design
HTML Layout
9. HTML Media Elements
Add Audio to a Webpage
Add video to a Webpage
10. HTML References
HTML references are essential resources that provide comprehensive information and guidance on the building blocks of webpages. They're perfect for both experienced developers and those just starting out.
Tags Reference
Attributes Reference
Global Attributes Reference
Event Attributes Reference
DOM Reference
DOM Audio/Videos Reference
HTML5 Reference
11. Interesting Facts in HTML
Here are some Interesting facts and features that highlight the importance of HTML in web development and how it shapes the structure of web pages:
Interesting Facts about HTML
Interesting Facts About HTML Links and Navigation
Interesting Facts About HTML Tables
Interesting Facts About HTML Lists
Interesting Facts About  HTML Meta Tags and SEO
Interesting Facts About  HTML5 APIs
12. HTML Miscellaneous
This HTML tutorial goes beyond the basics! Explore miscellaneous tags and elements to add comments, help search engines, embed multimedia, design forms, use hex color codes, and define specialized content areas.
Structure of HTML Document
Design a web page
Most commonly used HTML tags
HTML Form Design
Design your First Website in Just 1 Week
Simple Portfolio Website Design
Design a Portfolio Gallery
10 Best HTML Coding Practices You Must Know
Design a Login Form to an Image using HTML
HTML Tutorial - Prerequisites
ThisHTML tutorialis perfect for beginners! No prior knowledge is needed, but basic computer skills will help you to get started. After completing this tutorial, you'll have a basic understanding of HTML and be ready for the next stage of web development, CSS.
Best Approach to Learn HTML
You can complete this HTML tutorial in approximately 4 weeks if you dedicate consistent time and effort.
Week 1:Cover the fundamentals of HTML, including document structure, elements, attributes, comments, and basic tags like headings, paragraphs, and links.
Week 2:Learn to use HTML editors and tools, and work on beginner projects like a simple portfolio or event webpage, applying your knowledge of HTML tags.
Week 3: Focus on HTML tables, lists, and forms. Learn to organize data and create input fields, text areas, and buttons for user interaction.
Week 4:Explore advanced HTML5 features, responsive web design, and complete a final project to integrate everything you've learned.
By the end of 4 weeks, you'll be proficient in HTML and able to build dynamic and responsive web pages.
This approach will help you progressively build your HTML skills from fundamental to advanced levels, making you a HTML developer and ready for learning CSS and JS.
HTML Online Quiz
Now, To get the mastery in HTML test your knowledge and sharpen your problem-solving skills with HTML quizzes. The below linked quiz can easily enhance your logical skills and problem solving skills.
HTML Exercise – Quiz Set 1
HTML Exercise – Quiz Set 2
HTML Interview Questions
HTML Interview Questions for Beginners (2025)
HTML Intermediate Interview Questions and Answers (2025)
HTML Interview Questions For Experienced (2025)
HTML CheatSheet
HTML Cheat Sheetis a simple, and quick reference list of basic HTML elements and attributes. The purpose of this Cheat Sheet is to provide you with some quick accurate ready-to-use code snippets and necessary HTML tags and attributes.
HTML Projects
Whether you’re a beginner or looking to refine your HTML knowledge, creating projects like a personal portfolio, a basic landing page, or a responsive website can help you understand HTML in a more effective way. Engaging in such projects not only boosts your confidence but also adds value to your web development portfolio.
10 HTML Project Ideas & Topics For Beginners
Top 10 Projects For Beginners To Practice HTML and CSS Skills
Applications of HTML
HTML (HyperText Markup Language) is versatile in web development, with various practical applications:
Website Development:HTML forms the structure of websites, organizing content like text, images, and links for easy navigation.
Web Applications:HTML5 enables dynamic forms, multimedia handling, and interactive user experiences directly in browsers.
Email Templates:HTML helps create visually appealing, responsive email templates that adapt to different devices.
Game Development:HTML5, paired with JavaScript, allows the creation of simple, lightweight browser games.
Online Learning & Documentation:HTML structures educational content, making online resources easy to read and navigate.
Embedding Content: HTML simplifies embedding videos, maps, and social media feeds into web pages.
Careers with HTML in 2025
HTML is the most fundamental technology used for web development. Though expecting a high-paying job with just HTML knowledge can be challenging - if you want to build a successful career, you need to learn additional technologies also. For web development, you should also know CSS, JavaScript, and either a full-stack or front-end framework based on your interests.
That said, there are jobs that require only HTML skills. Here are some examples:
Web Content Editor: Creates and manages website content using HTML.
Email Developer: Designs and codes HTML emails for marketing campaigns.
Landing Page Designer: Builds landing pages to boost marketing conversions.
SEO Specialist: Optimizes website content using HTML for better search engine ranking.
HTML Email Tester: Tests HTML emails to ensure they display correctly on different devices.
Technical Writer: Writes documentation that may need basic HTML knowledge for web publishing.
Geek Tip:While HTML is a great starting point, learning more skills will improve your job prospects and salary.
Web Technologies
HTML
Tutorials
Web-Tech Tutorials
Similar Reads
Thank You!
What kind of Experience do you want to share?

[Images saved with this article:]
media.geeksforgeeks.org_img-practice_prod_courses_405_Mobile_Other_Course_ML___DS_1720846555.webp
media.geeksforgeeks.org_img-practice_prod_courses_874_Web_Content_frontend-interview-webp_1739529920.webp
media.geeksforgeeks.org_img-practice_prod_courses_345_Web_Content_javasc_1724254497.webp
media.geeksforgeeks.org_auth-dashboard-uploads_suggestChangeIcon.png
media.geeksforgeeks.org_auth-dashboard-uploads_createImprovementIcon.png