Master Generative AI with 10+ Real-world Projects in 2025!
d
h
m
s
More articles in Interview Prep
By Popular
By Latest
AI AgentsIntermediateInterview Prepinterview questionsTop 30 AI Agent Interview QuestionsHere's the top 30 interview questions on AI agents, along with their answers, covering foundational concepts to advanced agentic AI frameworksK.C. Sabreena Basheer09 May, 2025
Top 30 AI Agent Interview Questions
Here's the top 30 interview questions on AI agents, along with their answers, covering foundational concepts to advanced agentic AI frameworks
BeginnerGenerative AIInterview PrepGenerative AI Salary Trends 2025 EditionDiscover Generative AI Salary Trends, including pay scales, industry demand, and factors influencing earnings in AI careers.Ayushi Trivedi01 May, 2025
Generative AI Salary Trends 2025 Edition
Discover Generative AI Salary Trends, including pay scales, industry demand, and factors influencing earnings in AI careers.
BeginnerCareerChatGPTGenerative AI ApplicationInterview PrepHow to Prepare for a Job Interview with ChatGPT?Here's how you can use ChatGPT and its new Voice Mode to prepare for a job interview | mock interview with ChatGPT | interview preparationK.C. Sabreena Basheer20 Jan, 2025
How to Prepare for a Job Interview with ChatGPT?
Here's how you can use ChatGPT and its new Voice Mode to prepare for a job interview | mock interview with ChatGPT | interview preparation
AzureBeginnerInterview Prep25 Azure Interview Questions for Beginners25+ Azure Interview Questions 2025: Prepare for your upcoming interview with these interview questions and answers.Neil D13 Jan, 2025
25 Azure Interview Questions for Beginners
25+ Azure Interview Questions 2025: Prepare for your upcoming interview with these interview questions and answers.
BeginnerData AnalysisInterview PrepTop 50 Data Analyst Interview QuestionsExplore 50+ Data Analyst Interview Questions with detailed answers, covering beginner to advanced levels, including GenAI insights.Ayushi Trivedi09 Jan, 2025
Top 50 Data Analyst Interview Questions
Explore 50+ Data Analyst Interview Questions with detailed answers, covering beginner to advanced levels, including GenAI insights.
CareerGenerative AIIntermediateInterview Prep50+ Generative AI Interview Questions50+ Generative AI interview questions and MCQs covering the basic concepts and advanced technologies to help you ace your GenAI interview!Badrinarayan M01 May, 2025
50+ Generative AI Interview Questions
50+ Generative AI interview questions and MCQs covering the basic concepts and advanced technologies to help you ace your GenAI interview!
BeginnerCareerInterview PrepInterviewsInterviewsTop 10 Telephonic Interview TipsExplore the top ten essential telephonic interview tips to enhance performance and secure your dream job today!Yana Khare14 Aug, 2024
Top 10 Telephonic Interview Tips
Explore the top ten essential telephonic interview tips to enhance performance and secure your dream job today!
BeginnerInterview PrepInterviewsJobsHow to Introduce Yourself in a Job Interview?Master the art of the job interview with tips on preparation, presentation, and follow-up to make a lasting impression.Ayushi Trivedi02 Aug, 2024
How to Introduce Yourself in a Job Interview?
Master the art of the job interview with tips on preparation, presentation, and follow-up to make a lasting impression.
AWSBeginnerCareerInterview PrepListicleTop 30 AWS Interview Questions with AnswersPrepare for your AWS interview questions with confidence! Our comprehensive list of frequently asked questions and answers will help you excel .Abhishek Kumar10 Jan, 2025
Top 30 AWS Interview Questions with Answers
Prepare for your AWS interview questions with confidence! Our comprehensive list of frequently asked questions and answers will help you excel .
BeginnerCareerDatabaseInterview PrepSQLTop 30+ MySQL Interview QuestionsPrepare for your MySQL interview with over 30+ essential questions covering theory and practical skills, from basics to advanced concepts.Ayushi Trivedi07 Jan, 2025
Top 30+ MySQL Interview Questions
Prepare for your MySQL interview with over 30+ essential questions covering theory and practical skills, from basics to advanced concepts.
Interview Prep
Congratulations on being shortlisted for an interview! You are now one step closer to getting your dream job.
I’m sure you have the qualifications and skills required to get the job, but does that guarantee your selection? Getting your dream job is more than getting shortlisted for a job interview. Having the right skill set is one thing, but being able to demonstrate it in an interview is equally important. Soft skills such as communication skills, logical thinking, ability to work as part of a team, etc. will all be tested in an interview. So how can you prove to be the right candidate? Let us tell you how.
How to Prepare for a Job Interview
Before you begin preparing for your job interview, here are some generic articles to help you get started.
How to Introduce Yourself in a Job Interview?
How to Crack Data Science FAANG Jobs in 2024?
Now, preparing for a job interview is a 6-step process involving research and practice.
Research Phase
Know the role-based requirements
Understand the job description
Research about the company
Practice Phase
Practice on technical skills
Prepare answers to interview questions
Simulate the interview with mock interviews
Now let us go through each of the steps in detail.
Step 1: Know the Role-based Requirements
What you should do:
Find out the educational qualifications and technical skills required for the job.
Understand which of them are your strong suits and weak points.
Prepare to build conversations and answers around your strong suits.
Work on what you lack by doingonline courses, or preparing withinterview guideson those topics.
Main objectives:
Gain a clear understanding of the skills required for the job role and where you stand.
Having the right skill set is one thing, but being able to efficiently communicate this with your interviewer is a skill on its own. Make sure you highlight your best skills and back them up with experience or previous projects. This will help in further letting the company know why you qualify for the position.
One of the best ways to show your technical skills in a Data Science or AI interview is by sharing your portfolio. Here are some resources that can guide you on how to make your portfolio stand out.
How to Build a Portfolio for an AI Career
How to make an impressive Data Science Portfolio
Data Scientist Resume: Best Practices and Tips
If you’re thinking of what projects to add to your portfolio, here are some suggestions:
6 Open Source Data Science Projects That Provide an Edge to Your Portfolio
10 Data Science Projects Every Beginner Should Add to Their Portfolio
These projects will test your skills, help you brush up on your knowledge, and once done, show your interviewer what you are good at.
Step 2: Understand the Job Description
What you should do:
Read through the job description thoroughly.
Understand what a typical workday is like.
Plan how to align your previous experiences with the given job description.
Highlight related skills and similar responsibilities in your portfolio.
Main objectives:
Get a clear idea of what tasks you will be doing on a typical workday.
Know what teams you will be working with.
Figure out how best to present your technical background.
Step 3: Research About the Company
What you should do:
Check the company’s website and social media pages.
Understand the goals and values of the company.
Learn how the company operates and find out who you will be working with.
Find prospective colleagues, HR, and the company’s ex-employees on LinkedIn or other similar platforms.
Get in touch with them to know what the working conditions are like, what exactly your role will be, and some pros and cons of the job.
Main objectives:
Gain a good understanding of the company to speak about it confidently in the interview.
Know what questions to ask your interviewer regarding the company or your role.
Understand your future working conditions.
Make an informed decision about taking up the job
Step 4: Practice on Technical Skills
What you should do:
Practice on the technical skills required for the job, especially if it is a hands-on coding role.
Try learning new skills for the job by exploring some sample projects and solutions.
Main objective:
Be prepared for any coding questions the interviewer may ask you.
Build your portfolio with relevant projects that display your skillset.
Resources for Projects and Practice Problems
Top 18 Power BI Project Ideas For Practice 2024
Top 10 Platforms to Practice Data Science Skills
7 Best Platforms to Practice Python
Top 10 Platforms to Practice SQL in 2024
Top 10 Tableau Projects for Data Science
14 Exciting Mini Python Project Ideas for Beginners
Top 10 Web Scraping Projects to Do in 2024
5 Free Data Science Projects With Solutions
20 Data Engineering Project Ideas with Source Code
Top 10 Generative AI Projects
Top 14 Data Mining Projects With Source Code
10 Exciting Projects on Large Language Models (LLM)
Top 10 SQL Projects for Data Analysis
Top 10 Data Analytics Projects with Source Codes
Learn and Test your Machine Learning Skills with AV’s New Practice Problems and Free Courses!
So practice on some sample projects beforehand and brush up your technical skills while prepping for your interview.
Step 5: Prepare Answers to Interview Questions
What you should do:
Go through interview question guides on all the topics related to.
Emphasize more on the topics shortlisted in step 2.
If preparing to give a written test, practice answering theMCQson related topics.
Main objectives:
Be prepared for any technical or non-technical questions you maybe asked at your interview.
Gain a thorough understanding of all topics related to the job role.
Interview Question Guides on Specific Technical Skills
SQL (Query Language):Top 10 SQL Interview Questions With Implementation
Shell Scripting (Scripting Language/Skill):30+ Shell Scripting Interview Questions
DBMS (Database Management Systems – General Concept):Top 40 DBMS Interview Questions and Answers
Data Modelling (Data Science Concept):Data Modeling Interview Questions
NoSQL (Database Concept):Interview Questions on NoSQL
Probability (Mathematical Concept):25 Probability and Statistics Questions to Ace Your Data Science Interviews
Statistics (Mathematical Discipline):Top 40 Data Science Statistics Interview Questions
Linear Regression (Statistical/Machine Learning Algorithm):25 Questions to Test Your Skills on Linear Regression Algorithm
Reinforcement Learning (Machine Learning Technique):Top 5 Interview Questions on Reinforcement Learning
SVM (Support Vector Machine – Machine Learning Algorithm):Interview Questions on Support Vector Machines
Python (Programming Language):90+ Python Interview Questions and Answers (2024 Edition)
RAG (Retrieval-Augmented Generation):Top 20+ RAG Interview Questions
Interview Question Guides on Database Management Software
MySQL (Database Management System):Top 30+ MySQL Interview Questions
MongoDB (NoSQL Database):50+ MongoDB Interview Questions and Answers
Cassandra (NoSQL Database):Top 6 Cassandra Interview Questions
Microsoft HDFS (Hadoop Distributed File System):Top 6 Microsoft HDFS Interview Questions
Hadoop (Framework for Distributed Storage and Processing):Top 10 Hadoop Interview Questions You Must Know
Apache Oozie (Workflow Scheduler for Hadoop):Top 5 Interview Questions on Apache Oozie
Interview Question Guides on Data Science Tools
AWS (Cloud Service Platform):Top 30 AWS Interview Questions with Answers
Tableau (Data Visualization Software):Top 40 Tableau Interview Questions and Answers for 2024
Excel (Spreadsheet Software):50+ Excel Interview Questions to Ace Your Interview
Snowflake (Cloud Data Warehousing Software):15+ Snowflake Interview Questions and Answers
GCP (Google Cloud Platform):34 Must-Know GCP Interview Questions for 2024
Azure Data Factory (Cloud-based Data Integration Service):20 Most Frequently Asked Azure Data Factory Interview Questions
GCP BigQuery (Cloud Data Warehouse):Top Google BigQuery Frequently Asked Interview Questions
Amazon S3 (Cloud Storage Service):Top 6 Amazon S3 Interview Questions
Amazon Redshift (Cloud Data Warehousing Service):Top 6 Amazon Redshift Interview Questions
AWS DynamoDB (NoSQL Database Service):Top 30 AWS Interview Questions with Answers
PowerBi:Power BI Interview Questions & Answers 2024
Interview Question & Answer Video Guides
Top 21 Python Interview Questions & Answers
Python Coding Interview Questions & Answers – Part 1
Python Coding Interview Questions & Answers – Part 2
Top Interview Questions for Artificial Intelligence, Generative AI and LLMs to Land AI Jobs in 2024
Statistics Interview Questions and Answers for Data Science
Top 10 Deep Learning Interview Questions And Answers – Part 1
Top 10 Deep Learning Interview Questions and Answers – Part2
Artificial Intelligence Interview Questions and Answers
Data Analytics Interview Questions and Answers
SQL Interview Questions and Answers
Resources to Prepare for an AI Job Interview
How to Prepare for an AI Job Interview?
Top 50 AI Interview Questions with Answers
60+ Generative AI Terms You Must Know By Heart
5 Strategies for Acing Your AI Technical Interview
Resources to Prepare for an Data Science Job Interview
Top 15 Data Structures Interview Questions
Top 50 Google Interview Questions for Data Science Roles
Tips and Tricks to Crack Campus Placement in Data Science
10 Important Questions for Cracking a Data Science Interview
40 Data Science Coding Questions and Answers for 2024
Top 30 Deep Learning Interview Questions for Data Scientists
Top 30+ Big Data Interview Questions
Most Essential 2024 Interview Questions on Data Engineering
Top 50 Data Warehouse Interview Questions and Answers
Top 100 Data Science Interview Questions & Answers 2024
Resources to Prepare for a Machine Learning Job Interview
40 ML Interview Questions That You Must Know [2024]
30+ LLM Interview Questions and Answers
Top 9 Fine-tuning Interview Questions and Answers
Important Keras Questions for Cracking Deep Learning Interviews
25 Questions to Test Your Skills on ANN
Top 25 Interview Questions on RNN
Interview Questions on KNN in Machine Learning
Top 40 Machine Learning Questions & Answers for Beginners and Experts (Updated 2024)
15 Mlops Interview Questions for 2024
Interview Questions on Bagging Algorithms in Machine Learning
Step 6: Simulate the Interview with Mock Interviews
What you should do:
Find a mentor to guide you through the interview process. This could be a professor, industry leader, or someone who is currently in the same job role.
Once prepared, ask them to give you a mock trial of how the interview is going to be.
Take a mock interview, see how you fare, and work on your weak points till you master it.
Main objective:
Be completely prepared for your AI or Data Science job interview.
How you talk and present ideas in the interview is sometimes even more important than being qualified for the job. So taking a mock interview will give you a feel of the real deal. Alternatively, you can use AI tools such asLiftoff AIto practice your interview skills.
If you are having a telephonic interview, here are sometipsthat will help you ace it.
Once you have followed all these steps, I’m sure you will be ready to impress your interviewers. You will be well prepared for any theoritical, technical, and non-technical questions thrown at you. Your portfolio will shine over your competitors and you will surely get the job you deserve. So go ahead, and get that dream job!
Trending articles
BeginnerCareer40 Questions on Clustering Techniques for Data Science Professionalssaurav kaushik01 May, 2025
BeginnerCareerTop 40 Machine Learning Questions & Answers for Beginners and Experts (Updated 2025)Ankit Gupta04 Apr, 2025
BeginnerCareer45 Questions to Test a Data Scientist on Basics of Deep Learning (along with solution)Faizan Shaikh01 May, 2025
BeginnerCareerTop 30 KNN Interview Questions for Data ScientistsSunil Ray04 Apr, 2025
Flagship Programs
Free Courses
Popular Categories
Generative AI Tools and Techniques
Popular GenAI Models
AI Development Frameworks
Data Science Tools and Techniques
Continue your learning for FREE
Enter email address to continue
Enter OTP sent to
Edit
Enter the OTP
Resend OTP
Resend OTP in45s

[Images saved with this article:]
cdn.analyticsvidhya.com_wp-content_uploads_2025_05_ai_agent_interview.webp
cdn.analyticsvidhya.com_wp-content_uploads_2025_03_Generative-AI-Salary-Trends-2025-Edition.webp
cdn.analyticsvidhya.com_wp-content_uploads_2025_01_How_to_Prepare_for_a_Job_Interview_with_ChatGPTs_Voice_Mode.webp
cdn.analyticsvidhya.com_wp-content_uploads_2022_07_azure-interview-questions-1.webp
cdn.analyticsvidhya.com_wp-content_uploads_2025_01_Data-Analyst-Interview-Questions-.webp
cdn.analyticsvidhya.com_wp-content_uploads_2024_07_Gen-AI-interview-questions-01.webp
cdn.analyticsvidhya.com_wp-content_uploads_2023_04_Reinforcement-learning-interview-questions-80.jpg
cdn.analyticsvidhya.com_wp-content_uploads_2023_04_Reinforcement-learning-interview-questions-80.jpg
cdn.analyticsvidhya.com_wp-content_uploads_2024_08_aws-interview-questions-2.webp
cdn.analyticsvidhya.com_wp-content_uploads_2024_07_admin-ajax-1.webp
cdn.analyticsvidhya.com_wp-content_uploads_2024_09_Steps-to-get-to-your-dream-job-07-scaled.webp
cdn.analyticsvidhya.com_wp-content_uploads_2017_02_40-Questions-Answers-on-Clustering-Techniques-for-Data-Science-Professionals-Updated-2025.webp