Create a Free Website
Code 
                            websites directly in the browser withW3Schools Spaces
No credit card required.
Practice
Coding Skills
kAI
AI Tutor
Build
Websites
Host
Securely
Powerful Code Editor
Front-end, Back-end or Full-stack - the choice is yours
Choose your Plan
By subscribing to a plan you support the W3Schools mission to makelearning available to everyone - no matter their background.
Free
$0/Forever
This is for you that are beginning to explore coding and web development
Track your progress
Set your goals
Build and host 1 static website
100 credits/monthAccess various AI features like W3Schools kAI coding tutor and interview preparation.
No support
W3Schools Plus
$14.99/Month
This is for you that want to learn and reach your goals faster. Build fullstack projects, ad free experience.
Ad-free experience
Unlimited challenges
Unlimited practice tests
Build and host 15 static websites
Build and host 1 full stack server
Choose from 75+ templates
10000 credits/monthAccess various AI features like W3Schools kAI coding tutor and interview preparation.
Cancel anytime
W3Schools Academy
For teachers
Spend less time on admin tasks while engaging your students. Help them learn, practice and collaborate. All in one place.
Ad-free for focused learning
Dashboard to manage your classroom
Study plans for structured learning
Track progress with insights
Interactive code challenges and projects
Access to all courses and certification exams
Spaces for building and publishing projects
NEW SUBSCRIBER DEAL
25% OFF
FOR A YEAR
USE PROMO CODE:
Want custom domains?
You can also buy a domain or connect an existing one.
Looking to add multiple users?
kAI
Just landed inSpaces
Learn to code more effectivelyand intelligently with kAI - AI tutor
Hi! I'm kAI, W3Schools AI Tutor...
Feel free to ask me any coding-related questions, and I'll do my best to assist you.
I can help you checking your code for errors, improving your code's structure, explaining coding concepts in a clear and understandable way, and more...
I can even create complete websites for you based on your input, so what are you waiting for?
Practice Makes Perfect
Sharpen and Master your development skills with these technologies usingSpaces.
Save Time with Templates
Build powerful websites in just a few clicks
Super Simple to Share
Host and Publish Websites in no time
Included for free in all plans
W3Schools subdomain, hosting, and SSL certificate.
Want custom domains?
Buy a domain or transfer an existing one and connect it to your space.
How it works
Coding Made Easy
All at your fingertips with our easy-to-usecode editor
Cloud-based
Terminal & Log
How To Libraries
Database
File Navigator
Package Manager
Analytics
Environment Manager
Cloud-Based
Save Time & Money.
No installation required. Access everything in your browser. Get started in seconds.
File Navigator
All Your Files in One Place.
Find and switch easily between your code files without leaving the code editor.
Terminal and Log
Fix Your Code Faster.
Monitor your code, debug and troubleshoot your work during the development process.
Database
Get Full Data Visibility.
Find and preview all the data stored in your website. Anytime, from anywhere.
Environment Manager
Increased Control and Security.
Control your website access points to establish secure connections.
Package Manager
Find What You Need Quicker.
Search and install frameworks and libraries in just one click.
User Analytics
Get Traffic Insights.
Learn from your website visitors to deliver a better user experience.
Get Inspired
Connectandshareyour website with the community to get instant feedback
Frequently Asked Questions
With Basic Spaces, you can build frontend websites. Whereas with Fullstack Spaces, you can build frontend and backend websites.
Basic Spaces include HTML, CSS, and Javascript. Full Stack Spaces include everything in Basic Spaces plus PHP, Python, React.js, Vue.js, Node.js, Handlebars, and Django.
Your subscription will be automatically renewed every month.
Your access to all the benefits for the paid period of time will continue. However, the subscription will not be renewed automatically.
To subscribe W3Schools accounts for multiple users, you can contact sales@w3schools.com
Have some other questions?Visit our support page
Cancel anytime.
Contact Sales
If you want to use W3Schools services as an educational institution, team or enterprise, send us an e-mail:sales@w3schools.com
Report Error
If you want to report an error, or if you want to make a suggestion, send us an e-mail:help@w3schools.com
Top Tutorials
Top References
Top Examples
Get Certified

[Images saved with this article:]
www.w3schools.com_spaces_dynamicspaces.gif
www.w3schools.com_images_planet2.png
www.w3schools.com_spaces_languages.png
www.w3schools.com_spaces_portfolio_template.png
www.w3schools.com_spaces_blog_template.png
www.w3schools.com_spaces_webshop_template.png
www.w3schools.com_spaces_tutor_template.png
www.w3schools.com_spaces_domain.png
www.w3schools.com_spaces_how-spaces-works3.png
www.w3schools.com_spaces_spaces.png
www.w3schools.com_spaces_files.png
www.w3schools.com_spaces_debug.png
www.w3schools.com_spaces_database.png
www.w3schools.com_spaces_env.png
www.w3schools.com_spaces_package.png
www.w3schools.com_spaces_analytics.png
www.w3schools.com_spaces_discord.png