Power BI - Home
Power BI - Introduction
Power BI - Installation Steps
Power BI - Architecture
Power BI Desktop
Power BI - Desktop
Power BI - Desktop Window
Power BI Service
Power BI - Window Supported Browsers
Power BI - Generating Reports
Power BI Desktop Service
Power BI - Desktop vs Service
Power BI - Supported Data Sources
Power BI - Comparison Tools
Power Query Editor
Power Query Editor - Introduction
Power Query Editor - Data Discrepancy
Power Query Editor - Merge Queries (Part 1)
Power Query Editor - Merge Queries (Part 2)
Power BI - Develop Star Schema
Data Modeling Concepts
Power BI - Data Modeling
Power BI - Manage Relationships
Power BI - Cardinality
Power BI - Dashboard Options
Power BI Report Visualizations
Power BI - Visualization Options
Power BI - Visualization Charts
Power BI - Stacked Bar Chart
Power BI - Stacked Column Chart
Power BI - Clustered Chart
Power BI - 100% Stacked Chart
Power BI - Area Chart and Stacked Area Chart
Power BI - Line and Stacked Column Chart
Power BI - Line and Clustered Column Chart
Power BI - Ribbon Chart
Power BI - Table and Matrix Visuals
Power BI Map Visualizations
Power BI - Creating Map Visualizations
Power BI - ArcGIS Map
Power BI Miscellaneous
Power BI - Waterfall Charts
Funnel Charts and Radial Gauge Chart
Power BI - Scatter Chart
Power BI - Pie Chart and Donut Chart
Power BI - Card and Slicer Visualization
Power BI - KPI Visual
Power BI - Smart Narrative Visual
Power BI - Decomposition Tree
Power BI - Paginated Report
Power BI - Python Script & R Script
Power BI - Multi-row Card
Power BI - Power Apps & Power Automate
Power BI - Excel Integration
Power BI Dashboard
Power BI - Sharing Dashboards
Power BI Sales Production Dashboard
Power BI - HR Analytics Dashboard
Power BI - Customer Analytics Dashborad
Power BI - DAX Basics
Power BI - Administration Role
Power BI - DAX Functions
Power BI - DAX Text Functions
Power BI - DAX Date Functions
Power BI - DAX Logical Functions
Power BI - DAX Counting Functions
Power BI - Depreciation Functions
Power BI - DAX Information Functions
Power BI - Quick Guide
Power BI - Useful Resources
Power BI - Discussion
Selected Reading
UPSC IAS Exams Notes
Developer's Best Practices
Questions and Answers
Effective Resume Writing
AI Based Resume Builder
Personal AI Study Assistant
Generate Coding Logic
HR Interview Questions
Computer Glossary
Who is Who
Power BI Tutorial
Introduction to Power BI
Power BI is a Data Visualization and Business Intelligence tool that converts data from different data sources to interactive dashboards and BI reports. Power BI suite provides multiple software, connector, and services - Power BI desktop, Power BI service based on Saas, and mobile Power BI apps available for different platforms. These set of services are used by business users to consume data and build BI reports. This tutorial covers all the important concepts in Power BI and provides a foundational understanding on how to use Power BI.
What is Business Intelligence?
Business Intelligenceassists companies in processing and filtering massive amounts of stored data and transforming it into actionable insights. Mining, Data Warehouse, and Data Analytics are the correlated names of Business Intelligence. Exploratory data analysis, dashboards, and predictive modeling are the core methods of business intelligence.
Why do we need a Business Intelligence Tool?
In today's digital era, unstructured data is dispersed all around the world. Companies face difficulty in handling and monitoring huge amounts of data, which in turn negatively affects their business strategies and operation management. This is why the companies require powerful BI tools for quick decision-making to increase their sales production, increase the availability of structured data, generate immense reports, handle customers, track employee performance, and enhance operational efficiency.
Popular business intelligence tools such as Power BI andTableauare being used by financial companies and big firms like Deloitte, PwC, and EY to compile data from various sources and present it in an attractive format that can be used for making crucial business decisions and identifying market trends and patterns.
What are the Major Components of Power BI?
Following are the major components of Power BI −
1. Power Query
It is the process of cleansing and transforming data and permits users to access datasets connecting from multiple sources. It is included on the Power BI desktop. Business users may view the data from distinct databases likeMySQL,SQLservers,DB2, and many more.
2. Power View
It is a data visualization tool that assists users in developing stunning charts, and colorful maps, that turn data into a story.
3. Power Map
It is a 3D map visualization tool to identify geospatial data on Map visuals. It seamlessly helps organizations to examine the maximum sales production geographically, visualizing the demographic populations of specific regions.
4. Power Pivot
It is a Data Modelling technique that is used to create relationships between datasets. It performs complex computations by utilizing DAX functions.
5. Power Q & A
When dealing with giant datasets, it becomes crucial to get to know the in-depth details of the data. Luckily, it is done through natural language where users may ask questions and obtain the answer through Power Q & A.
Why Power BI as a Career?
Aspirants who are willing to make their career as a Power BI developer, researcher, business analyst, or data analyst should learn the Power BI tool and get certified by attempting the PL 300 exam. They should start from scratch and learn all the core components of Power BI.
Anyone who is well versed inExcelcan easily learn Power BI. The growing demand for Power BI professionals who can develop interactive dashboards and reports has been increasing continuously. Power BI is widely used in all domains, like healthcare, finance, manufacturing, retail, and more. This allows enthusiastic Power BI learners to grab opportunities in these domains.
Who Should Learn Power BI?
This tutorial has been prepared for beginners to help them understand the basic concepts of Power BI. This tutorial will give you enough understanding on Power BI, from where you can take yourself to a higher level of expertise.
Prerequisites to Learn Power BI
Before proceeding with this tutorial, you should be familiar with Microsoft Excel, data modeling, and have some knowledge of DAX language.
Outline of This Power BI Tutorial
The following table provides a list of topics covered in this Power BI tutorial −
Chapter
Description
Power BI  Introduction
This chapter provides a glimpse of the fundamental concepts of Power BI and its components.
Power BI  Installation Steps
This chapter explains the installation steps of the Power BI Desktop application on Windows.
Power BI  Architecture
This chapter provides an overview of the Power BI components, such as Power BI Desktop, Gateway, Power BI Mobile Apps, and Power BI Service.
Power BI  Desktop
This chapter describes various hidden qualities of the Power BI desktop's three views  Report View, Data View, and Model View.
Power BI  Desktop Window
This chapter gives you a deep insight into various interfaces of the Power BI Desktop windows.
Power BI  Windows Supported Browser
This chapter provides an overview of the Power BI service, supported browsers, and supported language in Power BI.
Power BI  Generating Reports
In this chapter, you will master proficiency in making a report using the Power BI service.
Power BI  Desktop vs Service
Different phases of the Power BI Desktop and Power BI Service and their differences are depicted in this chapter.
Power BI  Supported Data Sources
This chapter provides a detailed analysis of the data sources, including flat files, SQL databases, the Azure Cloud platform, and online services in Power BI.
Power BI  Comparison Tools
This section compares Power BI to other BI tools, such as Tableau, Microsoft Fabric, and SSRS.
Power Query Editor  Introduction
In this chapter, you will get an overview of the Power Query Editor, various options for transforming data, and various steps for transforming data into the Power Query Editor.
Power Query Editor  Data Discrepancy
This chapter will practice identifying data extraction and the concept of data extraction and transformation in the Power Query Editor.
Power Query Editor  Merge Queries (Part 1)
This chapter explains how to join tables in Power Query Editor using the Right Outer, Left Anti, and Right Anti Join.
Power Query Editor  Merge Queries (Part 2)
This chapter details the Inner Join, Left Outer Join, and Full Outer Join to merge two tables.
Power BI  Develop Star Schema
This section will explain how a fact table is connected to multiple  dimensional tables.
Power BI  Data Modeling
This chapter permits you to understand data modeling, add and remove relationships between tables, and create calculated columns.
Power BI  Manage Relationships
This chapter explains how users can manage relationships among tables using various tabs, such as auto  detect, create new relationships, edit existing relationships, and delete unwanted relationships.
Power BI  Cardinality
Multiple types of cardinalities in Power BI desktops are discussed in this section.
Power BI  Dashboard Options
This chapter describes multiple Dashboard options such as "Get Quick Insights," "Pin to Dashboard," "Tiles in Dashboard," and others.
Power BI  Visualization Options
This chapter explores various visualization options like Simple visualization, Map visualization, and combination charts.
Power BI  Visualization Charts
This chapter gives an overview of the multiple visualization charts, such as Stacked Bar charts, Stacked Column charts, Line charts, and more, available on the BI desktop.
Power BI  Stacked Bar Chart
In this chapter, you will learn how to create an interactive Stacked bar chart.
Power BI  Stacked Column Chart
This section explains the basic concept of the Stacked column chart and its creation in the BI desktop.
Power BI  Clustered Chart
In this chapter, you will get the master proficiency of generating the Clustered chart.
Power BI  100% Stacked Chart
This chapter provides deep insights into the 100% Stacked Chart.
Power BI  Area Chart and Stacked Area Chart
This section covers an overview of the Area Chart and Stacked Area Chart and their creation in the BI desktop.
Power BI  Line and Stacked Column Chart
In this chapter, you will learn the fundamental concept of the Line and Stacked Column Chart and the step  by  step explanation for generating it in the BI report.
Power BI  Line and Clustered Column Chart
In this chapter, you will learn how interactive Line and Clustered Column Charts are created in the BI report.
Power BI  Ribbon Chart
This chapter depicts the basic concept of the Ribbon chart and its creation to create the interactive report.
Power BI  Table and Matrix Visuals
The fundamental concept of generating the Table and Matrix visuals is explained in this section.
Power BI  Creating Map Visualizations
This chapter covers the multiple types of Map visualizations and explains how to generate the MAP, Filled Map, and TreeMap visualizations in the BI report.
Power BI  ArcGIS Map
In this chapter, you will learn how to develop the ArcGIS Map by signing up for ArcGIS Online or adding the location  based field to the Location section.
Power BI  Waterfall Charts
This chapter covers the benefits and steps to developing the interactive Waterfall chart by placing the crucial fields into the perspective sections in the Data Visualization pane.
Funnel Charts and Radial Gauge Chart
This chapter will give you deep insights into generating Funnel charts and Radial Gauge Charts on the BI desktop.
Power BI  Scatter Chart
This section explains the scatter charts fundamental concept and how it is created in the Power BI report.
Power BI  Pie Chart and Donut Chart
This chapter will demonstrate how to generate the Pie Chart and Donut chart in the BI report.
Power BI  Card and Slicer Visualization
This chapter covers evaluating the average employees monthly salary using Card Visualization and filtering the employee data according to their Job Roles.
Power BI  KPI Visual
In this chapter, you will learn how to create the KPI visual.
Power BI  Smart Narrative Visual
This chapter provides an in  depth study of the Smart Narrative Visual and how to utilize it along with other visuals effectively.
Power BI  Decomposition Tree
In this chapter, you will learn about the Decomposition Tree and its construction.
Power BI  Paginated Report
This chapter covers the Paginated Report's basic overview and illustrates various steps to generate a paginated report in the report builder tool and the Power BI desktop.
Power BI  Python Script & R Script
This chapter will explore how to use the Python Script and R script on the Power BI desktop.
Power BI  Multi row Card
The basic overview of the multi  row card and a detailed study of constructing it is explained in this section.
Power BI  Power Apps and Power Automate
This chapter provides an overview of Power Apps and Power Automate.
Power BI  Excel Integration
This chapter will teach you how to import the Excel dataset into the Power BI service.
Power BI  Sharing Dashboards
This chapter explains the basic overview of Dashboards, exploring datasets, and sharing dashboards with other users.
Power BI  HR Analytics Dashboard
This section will teach you how to create the stunning HR Analytics dashboard on the BI desktop.
Power BI  Customer Analytics Dashboard
In this chapter, you will explore how to generate a stunning Customer Analytics dashboard on the BI desktop.
Power BI  DAX Basics
This chapter covers the overview of the DAX function and the different categories of the DAX functions.
Power BI  Administration Role
This chapter explains the various administration roles assigned to the active users to obtain admin access.
Power BI  DAX Functions
This chapter explains the multiple types of DAX aggregate functions and their examples.
Power BI  DAX Text Functions
The various types of DAX text functions are provided in this section.
Power BI  DAX Date Functions
This chapter explores the multiple types of DAX Date functions, such as the HOUR, WEEKDAY, WEEKNUM, and NOW functions.
Power BI  DAX Logical Functions
This chapter details the numerous types of the DAX Logical functions along with their examples.
Power BI  DAX Counting Functions
This section will give you an overview of the DAX counting functions and its types.
Power BI  Depreciation Functions
This chapter provides detailed study of the Depreciation Functions and its types.
Power BI  DAX Information Functions
This section discusses the multiple types of DAX Information functions like CONTAINS, CONTAINSSTRING, CONTAINSSTRINGEXACT, etc.
FAQs on Power BI
There are some veryFrequently Asked Questions (FAQs)onPower BI, this section tries to answer them briefly.
This Power BI tutorial is made for the undergraduate and post graduate students that covers all the exclusive topics of Power BI and after that get the enrollment in our Power BI certification to compete in the market. Practicing more and connecting with the real time data in Power BI enhance your analytics skills.
Yes, only Power BI Desktop is free to use. Power BI desktop is free to use that you could install on your system with limited functionalities. Additionally, Power BI Pro and Power BI Premium require paid license.
Yes, Power BI is potent tool enriched with extensive features to facilitates budgeting and forecasting. It allows users to import the budget dataset and historical dataset, use what if analysis to dive into the different scenarios and to automate these processes.
Yes, Power BI manages large datasets depending on the license that users have taken.
Yes, you may customize the Power BI dashboards by selecting the custom report layout, choosing the interactive dashboard theme, adjusting the position, size and customized filters to manage data depicted in the dashboard.
The Power BI report link is required when embedding the report in the SharePoint Online that requires the Power BI Pro or Power BI premium license.
Steps to get a Power BI report link are as follows −
First, deliberate a report in the Power BI service.
Expand theFile, then clickEmbed reportand choose theSharePoint online
Now, copy the URL from the "Embed link for Sharepoint" dialog box.
Power BI is a popular tool among Business Analysts, Data Analysts, Financial Analysts, Researchers, Healthcare professionals, and Marketing Analysts.

[Images saved with this article:]
www.tutorialspoint.com_power_bi_images_power-bi-mini-logo.jpg
www.tutorialspoint.com_power_bi_images_power-bi.jpg