Swift - Home
Swift - Overview
Swift - Environment
Swift - Basic Syntax
Swift - Variables
Swift - Constants
Swift - Literals
Swift - Comments
Swift Operators
Swift - Operators
Swift - Arithmetic Operators
Swift - Comparison Operators
Swift - Logical Operators
Swift - Assignment Operators
Swift - Bitwise Operators
Swift - Misc Operators
Swift Advanced Operators
Swift - Operator Overloading
Swift - Arithmetic Overflow Operators
Swift - Identity Operators
Swift - Range Operators
Swift Data Types
Swift - Data Types
Swift - Integers
Swift - Floating-Point Numbers
Swift - Double
Swift - Boolean
Swift - Strings
Swift - Characters
Swift - Type Aliases
Swift - Optionals
Swift - Tuples
Swift - Assertions and Precondition
Swift Control Flow
Swift - Decision Making
Swift - if statement
Swift - if...else if...else Statement
Swift - if-else Statement
Swift - nested if statements
Swift - switch statement
Swift - Loops
Swift - for in loop
Swift - While loop
Swift - repeat...while loop
Swift - continue statement
Swift - break statement
Swift - fall through statement
Swift Collections
Swift - Arrays
Swift - Sets
Swift - Dictionaries
Swift Functions
Swift - Functions
Swift - Nested Functions
Swift - Function Overloading
Swift - Recursion
Swift - Higher-Order Functions
Swift Closures
Swift - Closures
Swift-Escaping and Non-escaping closure
Swift - Auto Closures
Swift OOps
Swift - Enumerations
Swift - Structures
Swift - Classes
Swift - Properties
Swift - Methods
Swift - Subscripts
Swift - Inheritance
Swift-Overriding
Swift - Initialization
Swift - Deinitialization
Swift Advanced
Swift - ARC Overview
Swift - Optional Chaining
Swift - Error handling
Swift - Concurrency
Swift - Type Casting
Swift - Nested Types
Swift - Extensions
Swift - Protocols
Swift - Generics
Swift - Access Control
Swift - Function vs Method
Swift - SwiftyJSON
Swift - Singleton class
Swift Random Numbers
Swift Opaque and Boxed Type
Swift - Compile Online
Swift - Quick Guide
Swift - Cheatsheet
Swift - Useful Resources
Swift - Discussion
Selected Reading
UPSC IAS Exams Notes
Developer's Best Practices
Questions and Answers
Effective Resume Writing
AI Based Resume Builder
Personal AI Study Assistant
Generate Coding Logic
HR Interview Questions
Computer Glossary
Who is Who
Swift Tutorial
Swift Tutorial
What is Swift Programming Language?
Why to Learn Swift?
Swift Jobs and Opportunities
Swift Online Compiler
Careers with Swift
Who Should Learn Swift
Prerequisites to Learn Swift
Frequently Asked Questions about Swift
Swift Tutorial
Swift is a new programming language developed by Apple Inc. for iOS and OS X development. It adopts the best of C and Objective-C, without the constraints of C compatibility. It uses the same runtime as the existing Obj-C system on Mac OS and iOS, which enables Swift programs to run on many existing iOS and OS X platforms.
This Swift tutorial will help you to understand Swift in a very easy and simple way. So that you can create your own Swift application or program. It will cover all the major concepts of Swift programming language which will boost your confidence and make you a good Swift programmer.
What is Swift Programming Language?
Swift is a modern and open-source programming language that is specifically designed by Apple for its platforms. It was introduced in 2014 with the aim of providing a language that is not only powerful and versatile but also provides great safety, performance, interoperability with Objective-C and modern syntax. So using Swift developers can easily develop robust and high-performance applications.
The latest version of Swift is Swift 5.9.2
We can also use swift to develop software for phones, desktops, and servers. Swift is a great combination of modern thinking and diverse contributions from its open-source community. The Swift compiler is optimized for its performance and the language itself is tailored for its development.
Why to Learn Swift?
If you are interested in developing an application for Apples ecosystem, then Swift is for you. Swift opens a gateway for you to create dynamic, innovative, and powerful applications for iOS, macOS, watchOS, and tvOS. Apple prefers Swift programming language as a primary language because it has modern syntax, high performance, provides great safety, and works seamlessly with all devices.
We can also use Swift to create applications for Windows and Android due to its open-source nature and cross-platform compatibility. Cross-platform app development allows developers to write code and then deploy it on multiple platforms, for example, Flutter, React Native, and Xamarin. However Swift offers this versatility, the user experience may not be as seamless as that can achieved by using other programming languages such as C#, .Net, Java, Kotlin etc.
Swift Jobs and Opportunities
In the dynamic era of technology, Swift programming language emerged as a milestone for creating user-friendly applications for Apples products. The demand for Swift's expertise is reaching to new heights and the market is loaded with lots of opportunities for talented developers. Whether you are a seasoned Swift developer or a newcomer you will have lots of opportunities with good packages. The average salary of a Swift developer is 5L to 12L per year, it can vary depending on the location, position and experience.
There are so many companies that provide a good package and working culture for Swift developers. It's impossible to list down all the company names that use Swift, but some
Apple
Google
Facebook
Microsoft
Amazon
Twitter
Airbnb
Snapchat
Adobe
Pinterest
Slack
Uber
Netflix
Swift Online Compiler
We have providedSwift Online Compiler/Interpreterwhich helps you to Edit and Executethe code directly from your browser.
Example
// First Swift program
print("Hello! Swift")
Output
Hello! Swift
Careers with Swift
Swift is a powerful and intuitive language for software development. It provides a robust platform for creating dynamic and effective applications for Apples ecosystem. It is commonly used to create seamless and innovative applications for iOS, macOS, watchOS and tvOS. Swift opens the doors for huge opportunities where the developer can show off his/her skills. Following are some potential career options with Swift programming language −
iOS/macOS App Developer
iOS/macOS App Developer
Mobile App Developer
Mobile App Developer
Game developer
Game developer
Augmented Reality(AR) developer
Augmented Reality(AR) developer
UI/UX designer for iOS app
UI/UX designer for iOS app
Quality Assurance(QA) engineer for iOS App
Quality Assurance(QA) engineer for iOS App
iOS Framework Developer
iOS Framework Developer
Swift Trainer
Swift Trainer
Swift Technical Writer
Swift Technical Writer
Cross-Platform Mobile Developer
Cross-Platform Mobile Developer
Full Stack Swift Developer
Full Stack Swift Developer
WatchOS App Developer
WatchOS App Developer
Who Should Learn Swift
This tutorial is designed for software programmers who would like to learn the basics of Swift programming language from scratch. This tutorial will give you enough understanding of Swift programming language that you can take yourself to higher levels of expertise.
Prerequisites to Learn Swift
Before proceeding with this tutorial, you should have a basic understanding of Computer Programming terminologies and exposure to any programming language.
Frequently Asked Questions about Swift
There are some very Frequently Asked Questions(FAQ) about Swift, this section tries to answer them briefly.
The latest version of Swift is Swift 5.9. It was released in September 2023 with new features like a macros system, generic parameters packs, ownership packs, and if and switch as expressions.
In Swift programming, we can say hello using the print() function. Simply write print(Hello world) and run this code in the compiler it will print Hello world on the screen without creating any extra variable.
Swift is a powerful and general programming language that is used to develop applications for iPhones, iPads, MacOS desktops, Apple Watches and TVs. It can also run on Linux and Windows operating systems.
There are six primary data types of Swift: String, Character, Integer, Float, Double, and Boolean.
There are six primary data types (String, Character, Int, Float, Double, and Bool), and four compound types (Array, Set, Dictionary, Tuples).
In Swift, we can declare a variable using thevarkeyword followed by a variable name with or without data type.
Example: var number: Int = 19 or var number = 12.
In Swift, we can define a constant using theletkeyword followed by the constant name with or without data type.
Example: let number: Int = 19 or let number = 12.
Double is a data type to store floating point numbers. It has a precision of at least 15 decimal digits. It is also known as a 64-bit floating point number. Due to its high precision Double is preferred by Swift as compared to Float.

[Images saved with this article:]
www.tutorialspoint.com_swift_images_swift-mini-logo.jpg
www.tutorialspoint.com_swift_images_swift.jpg
www.tutorialspoint.com_images_run-button.png