W3Schools Academy
Articles for Teachers
How TO
W3Schools Academy
Save time with study plans
Create your study plan to design structured learning paths for your class or individual students. Use pre-made teaching materials, add your own content, or combine both.
Personalized Study Plans
Every student learns differently. With W3Schools Study Plans, you can create plans that match each student's pace and needs, ensuring focus and engagement.
Choose from W3Schools resources
Save time with our comprehensive library and certification exams. Build high-quality plans from day one.
Create and use your own resources
Use our tools to create customized resources or add your own content. Align everything with your specific learning goals.
Adapt to your students
Create study plans for entire classes or individual students based on their progress and needs. Engage and support each student.
Interactive learningin every chapter
To help students understand what they've learned, each topic includes practical challenges and quizzes.
This allows them to test their understanding as they go and improve their skills through hands-on practice.
Clear structure for students
Students can easily follow their study plan with tasks like upcoming lessons, challenges, exams and deadlines. The calendar view helps them stay on track and never miss a deadline.
Schedule certification exams
Plan exams to align with your timeline and lessons. Ensure a structured learning journey from start to assessment.
Test your students using automated grading to reduce your workload.
Set up the study plan once, adjust anytime
Decide the timeline and structure that work best for you and your students.Whether it's an intensive 4-week course or a more gradual 12-week approach.
Week 1
Introduction and Basics, Formatting and Style, Colors, Links
Week 2
Images, Tables, Lists
Week 3
More HTML Elements, Logic, Forms
Week 4
Graphics, Media, APIs, HTML Certification Exam
With full flexibility, you can adjust pacing, add extra resources, or extend lessons to fit your students' needs. So no one feels rushed or left behind.
Supporting teachersfor 25+ years
For over 25 years, W3Schools has been a trusted resource for coding education. While other platforms cover many subjects, we focus only on programming.
Our courses, challenges, and exams are designed to help students build real coding skills, making it easier for teachers to create structured and engaging lessons.
What educators say
Nesta Paul Katende
Founder & CEO in Otic Foundation
We chose W3Schools Academy because of its proven ability to deliver high-quality education. With clear, concise, and interactive tutorials, W3Schools makes learning accessible to everyone.
Brian Moran
Co-Founder in Boolean Girl
Boolean Girl was looking for a single platform to teach Python and Web development to students. We already used W3Schools as a reference platform in our teaching so it made sense to also use the development environment.
Gavin Taylor
Head of Adult Education in LearnTech
W3Schools classroom solution allows students to complete the courses, and our tutors to monitor progress, set goals and provide support where needed. We recommend this classroom tool with W3Schools courses.
Tools your budget can afford
$5.99
Admin dashboard
All exams with certifications
Track students progress
Code challenges
Study plans
Collaboration tools
Fullstack Spaces
Ad-free learning
Minimum 10 students and 3-month commitment required
Get in touch with us
We're here to help!Fill out the form, and our team will reach out to you as soon as possible.
Your form has been sent successfully!
Your form could not be saved. Please try again.
Frequently asked questions
Can I create my own study plan?
Yes. You can use our pre-made content, add your own, or mix both.
Are the study plans flexible?
Yes. You can change the schedule and content at any time. You can assign them to individuals or whole classes.
Can I make different plans for each student?
Yes. You can create personalized plans for each class or student.
Can I include exams in the study plan?
Yes. You can schedule exams as part of the plan.
Can I export my study plan calendar to other calendar apps?
No. Unfortunately, it's not possible to export a study plan to other calendar apps right now.
Can students track their tasks?
Yes. A calendar view shows all their lessons, deadlines, assignments and exams.
Contact Sales
If you want to use W3Schools services as an educational institution, team or enterprise, send us an e-mail:sales@w3schools.com
Report Error
If you want to report an error, or if you want to make a suggestion, send us an e-mail:help@w3schools.com
Top Tutorials
Top References
Top Examples
Get Certified

[Images saved with this article:]
www.w3schools.com_academy_images_study_plans_personalized.png
www.w3schools.com_academy_images_study_plans_personalized_mobile.png
www.w3schools.com_academy_images_study_plans_structure.png
www.w3schools.com_academy_images_study_plans_structure_mobile.png
www.w3schools.com_academy_images_study_plans_setup.png
www.w3schools.com_academy_images_teacher_nesta_paul.png
www.w3schools.com_academy_images_teacher_brian_moran.png
www.w3schools.com_academy_images_teacher_gavin_taylor.png