

Online Programming Compilers
C
C++
Python
Java
C#
Php
Scala
Swift
HTML
CSS3
JavaScript
SQL Editor
Golang
Ruby
Lua
Code, Edit, Run and Share
Log InSign Up
Start Coding
Ada(Gnat)
Algol-68
Angular JS
Ascii Doc
Assembly
Awk
Bash Shell
Befunge
Bootstrap
Brainf**k
C
Chipmunk BASIC
Clojure
Cobol
CoffeeScript
C++
C#
CSS3
Dart
D3.js
D Language
Embedded C
Erlang
Elixir
Factor
Fantom
Fortran-95
Forth
F#
Free Basic
Groovy
Golang
Haxe
Haskell
HTML5
ilasm
Intercal
ICON
Javascript
Java 8
Julia
Jython
JQuery
JQuery Mobile
JQuery UI
Kotlin
Ksh Shell
Latex
Lisp
Linux Terminal
LOLCODE
Lua
Lua Terminal
Matlab/Octave
Matplotlib
Malbolge
Markdown
MathML
Mozart-OZ
Nimrod
Node.js
NumPy
Node.js Terminal
Numpy Terminal
Objective-C
OCaml
Octave Terminal
P5.js
Pascal
PARI/GP
Pawn
Perl
PHP
PHP Terminal
Pike
Prolog
Processing.js
Python
reStructure
Rexx
R Programming
R Terminal
Ruby Terminal
Ruby
Rust
SciPy
SciPy Terminal
Smalltalk
SML/NJ
Simula
SQLite SQL
Swift 4.0
Tcl
Tex
Typescript
Unlambda
VB.NET
Verilog
VueJS
Web View
Whitespace
Ya Basic
Yasm
Coding Ground: Popular Compilers & Terminals
Explore our wide range of editors, terminals, compilers, and interpreters that support almost all technologies with absolutely no strings!
Data ScienceTechnologies
Top ProgrammingLanguages
OnlineTerminals
Online Compiler& Interpreters
Web Development Technologies
Document Editors
The Best of Tutorials Point
Make the most of our free vast library of text tutorials curated by industry veterans for your wealth of knowledge
Technical Question and Answer
Stay informed about the latest trends and best practices of all technologies in one place
Premium Courses & Certifications
Explore our thoughtfully collected courses and expert-curated certifications to grow professionally and personally
Expert Tutors
Learn from top-rated global instructors that bring industry expertise for your digital training

Instant learning,one click away
SIGN IN
or
Don't have an account?Register

Artificial Intelligence Tutorial
AI - Home
AI - Overview
AI - History & Evolution
AI - Types
AI - Terminology
AI - Tools & Frameworks
AI - Applications
AI - Real Life Examples
AI - Ethics & Bias
AI - Challenges
Branches in AI
AI - Research Areas
AI - Machine Learning
AI - Natural Language Processing
AI - Computer Vision
AI - Robotics
AI - Fuzzy Logic Systems
AI - Neural Networks
AI - Evolutionary Computation
AI - Swarm Intelligence
AI - Cognitive Computing
Intelligent Systems in AI
AI - Intelligent Systems
AI - Components of Intelligent Systems
AI - Types of Intelligent Systems
Agents & Environment
AI - Agents and Environments
Problem Solving in AI
AI - Popular Search Algorithms
AI - Constraint Satisfaction
AI - Constraint Satisfaction Problem
AI - Formal Representation of CSPs
AI - Types of CSPs
AI - Methods for Solving CSPs
AI - Real-World Examples of CSPs
Knowledge in AI
AI - Knowledge Based Agent
AI - Knowledge Representation
AI - Knowledge Representation Techniques
AI - Propositional Logic
AI - Rules of Inference
AI - First-order Logic
AI - Inference Rules in First Order Logic
AI - Knowledge Engineering in FOL
AI - Unification in First Order Logic (FOL)
AI - Resolution in First Order Logic (FOL)
AI - Forward Chaining and backward chaining
AI - Backward Chaining vs Forward Chaining
Expert Systems in AI
AI - Expert Systems
AI - Applications of Expert Systems
AI - Advantages & Limitations of Expert Systems
AI - Applications
AI - Predictive Analytics
AI - Personalized Customer Experiences
AI - Manufacturing Industry
AI - Healthcare Breakthroughs
AI - Decision Making
AI - Business
AI - Banking
AI - Autonomous Vehicles
AI - Automotive Industry
AI - Data Analytics
AI - Marketing
Artificial Intelligence Resources
Artificial Intelligence - Quick Guide
Artificial Intelligence - Interview Questions & Answers
AI - Useful Resources
Artificial Intelligence - Discussion
Selected Reading
UPSC IAS Exams Notes
Developer's Best Practices
Questions and Answers
Effective Resume Writing
AI Based Resume Builder
Personal AI Study Assistant
Generate Coding Logic
HR Interview Questions
Computer Glossary
Who is Who
Artificial Intelligence Tutorial
Thisartificial intelligence tutorialprovides introductory knowledge on Artificial Intelligence. It would be a great help if you are about to select Artificial Intelligence as a course subject. You can briefly learn about the areas of AI in which research is prospering.
This tutorial provides a good understanding of the workings of AI and its applications. This tutorial would be a good choice for someone who is a beginner and also for someone who would want to know more about it.
What is Artificial Intelligence?
Artificial Intelligence(AI) is that branch of computer science that creates intelligent machines that think and act like humans. It is one of the revolutionizing technologies that people are fascinated by because of its ability to relate to their daily lives. AI enables machines to think, learn and adapt, to enhance and automate tasks across industries.
Artificial Intelligence has many subsets that focus on different aspects of mimicking human beings.Machine learningis one of the popular subsets, whereas the others included areDeep Learning,Natural Language Processing, andRobotics.
Features of Artificial Intelligence
Artificial Intelligence is a technology that aims at replicating human intelligence. It has numerous applications across various sectors, from enhancing customer experiences to disease diagnosis. Some key features of AI are:
Ability to learn −AI systems can improve their performance eventually by learning from data and past experiences.
Logical decision making −AI systems are fed with large amounts of data to understand and recognize patterns for analysis and decision making.
Adaptability −AI systems can adjust and adapt to changes in data.
Efficient automation −AI would efficiently execute repetitive tasks and processes.
Versatility −AI can be widely applied for various tasks across all fields like businesses, automotive, health, and many others.
Why to Learn Artificial Intelligence?
AI is one of the growing technologies, and learning AI would help build a career in a field that is high in demand. It opens up to various job opportunities and helps you stay intent with evolving technologies. It enhances problem solving skills, automates processes and can be applied to various industries, from business to health care.
Who Should Learn Artificial Intelligence?
This tutorial is prepared for students at the beginner level who aspire to learn Artificial Intelligence.
This course is also helpful for professionals aiming to enhance their skills or an entrepreneur trying to integrate AI with their business. Professionals in software development, data science, and engineering would find this artificial intelligence tutorial especially relevant to enhance their careers.
Applications of Artificial Intelligence
AI is transforming various industries with its ability to automate, make decisions, and enhance the efficiency of various tasks. As it is known for its versatility, some of its applications are:
Health care −AI in healthcare is used to assist in tasks like diagnosing diseases, personalizing treatments and drug discovery.
Finance −AI is used for fraud detection, trading and stock market analysis and customer service through chatbots.
Manufacturing and Industries −AI optimizes production processes, improves quality and identifies machinery failure.
Agriculture −AI helps combine technology with agriculture by analyzing soil conditions.
Transportation −AI helps in designing autonomous vehicles. Some other tasks include traffic management and route optimization in maps.
Customer Service −Chatbots and Virtual assistants are AI applications to improve user engagement.
Entertainment and Media −AI helps in content creation, personalized content recommendations, and target advertising.
Safety and Security −AI enhances threat detection and automates security measures.
Jobs and Opportunities
Many companies require highly skilled individuals in AI. As companies integrate AI into their operation, there will be a need for individuals to implement it. Some roles that companies hire are:
Machine learning engineer
Data Scientist
AI Research Scientist
Computer Vision Engineer
NLP Engineer
AI Product Manager
AI Marketing Specialist
Prerequisites to Learn Artificial Intelligence
The basic knowledge of Computer Science is mandatory. Knowledge of science, mechanical engineering, or electrical engineering is a plus.
Before deep diving into Artificial Intelligence, there are a few skills and concepts that one should focus on, which includes −
Mathematics and Statistics
Knowledge of any programming language such as Python or R.
Basics on Data Structures and Data Handling Techniques
Getting Started with Artificial Intelligence
Getting started to learn AI involves a few steps, which helps build a solid foundation. Here is a brief guide on the steps that can make you strong in the fundamentals of AI:
Master Prerequisites −AI is complex, so you can only get deep into the technology if you have interest and enthusiasm. The first step is to master prerequisites, which include an understanding of basic mathematics and statistics along with learning a programming language and data structures.
Learn AI algorithms −Artificial Intelligence is all about algorithms like searching and sorting. So if you get familiar with algorithms, you can ace AI.
Getting to know AI tools and frameworks −The final step would be learning to handle AI frameworks. This is a practical step and requires prior theoretical knowledge. Some popular tools and libraries used to develop and deploy AI models are NumPy, Pandas, Matplotlib.
Practice with Real data −Practicing AI algorithms on real data that is collected from various websites or APIs would help understand the working of AI in real-time scenarios.
Frequently Asked Questions about Artificial Intelligence
There are some very Frequently Asked Questions(FAQ) about Artificial Intelligence, this section tries to answer them briefly.
Artificial Intelligence (AI) refers to programming computers to do tasks that normally require human intelligence, like learning, problem-solving, and understanding language. It is like giving computers the ability to think and make decisions on their own, similar to how humans do. AI helps machines learn from data, adapt to new situations, and perform tasks without being explicitly programmed for each step.
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is important because it helps make our lives easier and improves many aspects of society. It allows computers to perform tasks that normally require human intelligence, like understanding language, recognizing patterns, and making decisions.
AI helps in various fields such as healthcare, finance, transportation, and entertainment by providing better solutions, automating repetitive tasks, and even discovering new insights from large amounts of data. Ultimately, AI has the potential to revolutionize industries, enhance efficiency, and create new opportunities for innovation and growth.
Artificial Intelligence (AI) can be broadly categorized into three types −
Narrow or Weak AI −This type of AI is designed to perform specific tasks or solve particular problems. It is good at what it is programmed for, like playing chess or recognizing speech, but it can't do tasks outside its programmed scope.
Narrow or Weak AI −This type of AI is designed to perform specific tasks or solve particular problems. It is good at what it is programmed for, like playing chess or recognizing speech, but it can't do tasks outside its programmed scope.
General or Strong AI −General AI would have human-like intelligence and could perform any intellectual task that a human can. This level of AI doesn't exist yet, but it is the goal of many AI researchers to create machines that can think and learn like humans.
General or Strong AI −General AI would have human-like intelligence and could perform any intellectual task that a human can. This level of AI doesn't exist yet, but it is the goal of many AI researchers to create machines that can think and learn like humans.
Artificial Superintelligence (ASI) −This would be an AI system that surpasses human intelligence in every way. It would be capable of understanding, learning, and solving problems far beyond what humans can comprehend. ASI is still purely theoretical and raises significant ethical and existential questions.
Artificial Superintelligence (ASI) −This would be an AI system that surpasses human intelligence in every way. It would be capable of understanding, learning, and solving problems far beyond what humans can comprehend. ASI is still purely theoretical and raises significant ethical and existential questions.
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is used in various applications across different fields −
Virtual Assistants −AI powers virtual assistants like Siri, Alexa, and Google Assistant, helping users with tasks such as setting reminders, answering questions, and controlling smart devices.
Virtual Assistants −AI powers virtual assistants like Siri, Alexa, and Google Assistant, helping users with tasks such as setting reminders, answering questions, and controlling smart devices.
Healthcare −AI is used to analyze medical data, assist in diagnoses, and develop personalized treatment plans. It also helps in drug discovery, medical imaging interpretation, and monitoring patient health.
Healthcare −AI is used to analyze medical data, assist in diagnoses, and develop personalized treatment plans. It also helps in drug discovery, medical imaging interpretation, and monitoring patient health.
Finance −AI is used in fraud detection, risk assessment, algorithmic trading, and customer service in the financial sector to improve efficiency and accuracy.
Finance −AI is used in fraud detection, risk assessment, algorithmic trading, and customer service in the financial sector to improve efficiency and accuracy.
Autonomous Vehicles −AI enables self-driving cars to recognize their surroundings, navigate safely, and make decisions on the road, potentially reducing accidents and improving transportation.
Autonomous Vehicles −AI enables self-driving cars to recognize their surroundings, navigate safely, and make decisions on the road, potentially reducing accidents and improving transportation.
Recommendation Systems −AI powers recommendation algorithms used by platforms like Netflix, Amazon, and Spotify to suggest personalized content based on users preferences and behavior.
Recommendation Systems −AI powers recommendation algorithms used by platforms like Netflix, Amazon, and Spotify to suggest personalized content based on users preferences and behavior.
Natural Language Processing (NLP) −AI is used in NLP applications like language translation, sentiment analysis, and chatbots to understand and generate human language.
Natural Language Processing (NLP) −AI is used in NLP applications like language translation, sentiment analysis, and chatbots to understand and generate human language.
Robotics −AI is essential in robotics for tasks such as object recognition, path planning, and manipulation, enabling robots to perform complex actions in various environments.
Robotics −AI is essential in robotics for tasks such as object recognition, path planning, and manipulation, enabling robots to perform complex actions in various environments.
Gaming −AI is used in gaming for creating realistic virtual opponents, generating dynamic game environments, and enhancing player experiences through adaptive gameplay.
Gaming −AI is used in gaming for creating realistic virtual opponents, generating dynamic game environments, and enhancing player experiences through adaptive gameplay.
The future of Artificial Intelligence (AI) holds exciting possibilities. AI is expected to continue advancing and becoming more integrated into our daily lives, from improving healthcare and transportation to enhancing entertainment and communication. We may see AI-powered technologies becoming even smarter and more capable, enabling them to solve complex problems, make decisions autonomously, and adapt to new situations.
However, there are also concerns about the impact of AI on jobs and society, so it is important for us to consider ethical implications and ensure that AI is developed responsibly. Overall, the future of AI promises innovation and convenience but also calls for careful consideration of its implications to ensure a positive impact on society.
To learn Artificial Intelligence (AI), start with understanding its basics and learning programming, especially in languages like Python. Dive into machine learning, focusing on algorithms and frameworks, and then explore deep learning techniques for neural networks. Practice with projects of increasing complexity and stay updated with the latest advancements in AI through reading, following experts, and participating in online courses or competitions.
In simple terms, AI cannot take over the world like in science fiction movies. While AI is powerful and can perform many tasks, it doesn't have intentions, desires, or emotions like humans do. AI systems are created and controlled by humans, and they only do what they are programmed to do. However, there are concerns about AI being misused or causing unintended consequences if not developed responsibly. It is essential for humans to ensure that AI is used ethically and for the benefit of society, rather than allowing it to control or harm us.
Artificial Intelligence (AI) does not have a single inventor because it is a field of study that has evolved over many years with contributions from various scientists and researchers. However, the term "artificial intelligence" was coined in 1956 by John McCarthy, Marvin Minsky, Allen Newell, and Herbert A. Simon during a conference at Dartmouth College. They proposed the idea of creating machines that could simulate human intelligence. Since then, countless individuals have contributed to the development of AI through research, experimentation, and innovation in areas like machine learning, robotics, natural language processing, and more.
Artificial Intelligence (AI) can be integrated into mobile apps to enhance user experience and functionality. Developers can use AI for personalization by analyzing user data and providing modified recommendations or content. Voice assistants powered by AI enable hands-free interaction with the app through voice commands. Predictive analytics can be implemented to anticipate user behavior and offer suggestions or notifications. Features such as image recognition and natural language processing allow for advanced functionalities like object identification, augmented reality experiences, and chatbots.
Additionally, AI-driven security measures such as biometric authentication enhance app security, while smart automation streamlines processes and improves efficiency within the app.
In education, Artificial Intelligence (AI) is used to personalize learning by adapting content and pace to individual students, provide instant tutoring and feedback, automate grading processes, and identify learning gaps through data analysis. AI also helps create and curate educational materials, facilitate language learning, and improve accessibility for students with disabilities, enhancing the effectiveness of educational experiences.
The risks of Artificial Intelligence (AI) include potential job loss due to automation, biased decision-making leading to unfair outcomes, concerns about privacy and data security, and the possibility of safety and security vulnerabilities being exploited. Additionally, ethical dilemmas may arise, such as accountability for AI-driven decisions and the implications of autonomous systems on human well-being, highlighting the importance of responsible development and use of AI technologies.
Artificial Intelligence Articles
You can explore a set of Artificial Intelligence articles atArtificial Intelligence Articles.

ML - Home
ML - Introduction
ML - Getting Started
ML - Basic Concepts
ML - Ecosystem
ML - Python Libraries
ML - Applications
ML - Life Cycle
ML - Required Skills
ML - Implementation
ML - Challenges & Common Issues
ML - Limitations
ML - Reallife Examples
ML - Data Structure
ML - Mathematics
ML - Artificial Intelligence
ML - Neural Networks
ML - Deep Learning
ML - Getting Datasets
ML - Categorical Data
ML - Data Loading
ML - Data Understanding
ML - Data Preparation
ML - Models
ML - Supervised Learning
ML - Unsupervised Learning
ML - Semi-supervised Learning
ML - Reinforcement Learning
ML - Supervised vs. Unsupervised
Machine Learning Data Visualization
ML - Data Visualization
ML - Histograms
ML - Density Plots
ML - Box and Whisker Plots
ML - Correlation Matrix Plots
ML - Scatter Matrix Plots
Statistics for Machine Learning
ML - Statistics
ML - Mean, Median, Mode
ML - Standard Deviation
ML - Percentiles
ML - Data Distribution
ML - Skewness and Kurtosis
ML - Bias and Variance
ML - Hypothesis
Regression Analysis In ML
ML - Regression Analysis
ML - Linear Regression
ML - Simple Linear Regression
ML - Multiple Linear Regression
ML - Polynomial Regression
Classification Algorithms In ML
ML - Classification Algorithms
ML - Logistic Regression
ML - K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN)
ML - Naïve Bayes Algorithm
ML - Decision Tree Algorithm
ML - Support Vector Machine
ML - Random Forest
ML - Confusion Matrix
ML - Stochastic Gradient Descent
Clustering Algorithms In ML
ML - Clustering Algorithms
ML - Centroid-Based Clustering
ML - K-Means Clustering
ML - K-Medoids Clustering
ML - Mean-Shift Clustering
ML - Hierarchical Clustering
ML - Density-Based Clustering
ML - DBSCAN Clustering
ML - OPTICS Clustering
ML - HDBSCAN Clustering
ML - BIRCH Clustering
ML - Affinity Propagation
ML - Distribution-Based Clustering
ML - Agglomerative Clustering
Dimensionality Reduction In ML
ML - Dimensionality Reduction
ML - Feature Selection
ML - Feature Extraction
ML - Backward Elimination
ML - Forward Feature Construction
ML - High Correlation Filter
ML - Low Variance Filter
ML - Missing Values Ratio
ML - Principal Component Analysis
Reinforcement Learning
ML - Reinforcement Learning Algorithms
ML - Exploitation & Exploration
ML - Q-Learning
ML - REINFORCE Algorithm
ML - SARSA Reinforcement Learning
ML - Actor-critic Method
ML - Monte Carlo Methods
ML - Temporal Difference
Deep Reinforcement Learning
ML - Deep Reinforcement Learning
ML - Deep Reinforcement Learning Algorithms
ML - Deep Q-Networks
ML - Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient
ML - Trust Region Methods
Quantum Machine Learning
ML - Quantum Machine Learning
ML - Quantum Machine Learning with Python
Machine Learning Miscellaneous
ML - Performance Metrics
ML - Automatic Workflows
ML - Boost Model Performance
ML - Gradient Boosting
ML - Bootstrap Aggregation (Bagging)
ML - Cross Validation
ML - AUC-ROC Curve
ML - Grid Search
ML - Data Scaling
ML - Train and Test
ML - Association Rules
ML - Apriori Algorithm
ML - Gaussian Discriminant Analysis
ML - Cost Function
ML - Bayes Theorem
ML - Precision and Recall
ML - Adversarial
ML - Stacking
ML - Epoch
ML - Perceptron
ML - Regularization
ML - Overfitting
ML - P-value
ML - Entropy
ML - MLOps
ML - Data Leakage
ML - Monetizing Machine Learning
ML - Types of Data
Machine Learning - Resources
ML - Quick Guide
ML - Cheatsheet
ML -  Interview Questions
ML - Useful Resources
ML - Discussion
Selected Reading
UPSC IAS Exams Notes
Developer's Best Practices
Questions and Answers
Effective Resume Writing
AI Based Resume Builder
Personal AI Study Assistant
Generate Coding Logic
HR Interview Questions
Computer Glossary
Who is Who
Machine Learning (ML) Tutorial
ThisMachine Learning (ML) tutorialwill provide a detailed understanding of the concepts ofmachine learningsuch as, different types of machine learning algorithms, types, applications, libraries used in ML, and real-life examples.
What is Machine Learning
Machine Learning (ML)is a branch ofArtificial Intelligence (AI)that works on algorithm developments and statistical models that allow computers to learn from data and make predictions or decisions without being explicitly programmed.
How does Machine Learning Work?
Machine Learning process includes Project Setup, Data Preparation, Modeling and Deployment. The following figure demonstrates the common working process of Machine Learning. It follows some set of steps to do the task; a sequential process of its workflow is as follows:
Stages of Machine Learning
The following are the stages (detailed sequential process) of Machine Learning:
Data collection:Data collection is an initial step in the process of machine learning. In this stage, it collects data from the different sources such as databases, text files, pictures, sound files, or web scraping. This process organizes the data in an appropriate format, such as a CSV file or database, and makes sure that they are useful for solving your problem.
Data pre-processing:It is a key step in the process of machine learning, which involves deleting duplicate data, fixing errors, managing missing data either by eliminating or filling it in, and adjusting and formatting the data.
Choosing the right model:The next step is to select a machine learning model; once data is prepared, then we apply it to ML models like linear regression, decision trees, and neural networks that may be selected to implement. This selection depends on many factors, such as the kind of data and your problem, the size and type of data, the complexity, and the computational resources.
Training the model:This step includes training the model from the data so it can make better predictions.
Evaluating the model:When module is trained, the model has to be tested on new data that they haven't been able to see during training.
Hyperparameter tuning and optimization:After evaluating the model, you may need to adjust its hyperparameters to make it more efficient. You should try different combinations of parameters and cross-validation to ensure that the model performs well on different data sets.
Predictions and deployment:When the model has been programmed and optimized, it will be ready to estimate new data. This is done by adding new data to the model and using its output for decision-making or other analysis. The deployment includes its integration into a production environment to make it capable of processing real-world data.
Types of Machine Learning
Machine learning models fall into the following categories:
Supervised Machine Learning (SVM):It is a type of machine learning that trains the model using labeled datasets to predict outcomes.
Unsupervised Machine Learning:It is a type of machine learning that learns patterns and structures within the data without human supervision.
Semi-supervised learning:It is a type of machine learning that is neither fully supervised nor fully unsupervised. The semi-supervised learning algorithms basically fall between supervised and unsupervised learning methods.
Reinforcement Machine Learning:It is a type of machine learning model that is similar to supervised learning but does not use sample data to train the algorithm. This model learns by trial and error.
Common Machine Learning Algorithms
Several machine learning algorithms are commonly used. These include:
Neural networks: It works like the human brain with many connected nodes. They help to find patterns and are used in language processing, image and speech recognition, and creating images.
Linear regression: It predicts numbers based on past data. For example, it helps estimate house prices in an area.
Logistic regression: It predicts like "yes/no" answers and it is useful for spam detection and quality control.
Clustering: It is used to group similar data without instructions and it helps to find patterns that humans might miss.
Decision trees: They help to classify data and predict numbers using a tree-like structure. They are easy to check and understand.
Random forests: They combine multiple decision trees to improve predictions.
Importance of Machine Learning
Machine Learning is important in automation, extracting insights from data, and decision-making processes. It has its significance due to the following reasons:
Data Processing:Machine learning is useful to analyze large data from social media, sensors, and other sources and help to reveal patterns and insights to improve decision-making.
Data-Driven Insights:Machine learning algorithms find trends and connections in big data that humans might miss, which helps to take better decisions and predictions.
Automation:Machine learning automates the repetitive tasks, reducing errors and saving time.
Personalization:Machine learning is useful to analyze the user preferences to provide personalized recommendations in e-commerce, social media, and streaming services. It helps in many manners, such as to improve user engagement, etc.
Predictive Analytics:Machine learning models use past data to predict future outcomes, which may help for sales forecasts, risk management, and demand planning.
Pattern Recognition:Machine learning is useful in pattern recognition during image processing, speech recognition, and natural language processing.
Finance:Machine learning is used in credit scoring, fraud detection, and algorithmic trading.
Retail:Machine learning helps to enhance the recommendation systems, supply chain management, and customer service.
Fraud Detection & Cybersecurity:Machine learning detects the fraudulent transactions and security threats in real time.
Continuous Improvement:Machine learning models update regularly with new data, which allows them to adapt and improve over time.
Applications of Machine Learning
Machine learning is used in various fields. Some of the most common applications include:
Speech Recognition: Machine learning is used to convert spoken language into text using natural language processing (NLP). It is used in voice assistants like Siri, voice search, and text accessibility features on mobile devices.
Customer Service: There are several chatbots that are useful for reducing human interaction and providing better support on websites and social media, handling FAQs, giving recommendations, and assisting in e-commerce. For example, virtual agents, Facebook Messenger bots, and voice assistants.
Computer Vision: It helps computers in analyzing the images and videos to take action. It is used in social media for photo tagging, in healthcare for medical imaging, and in self-driving cars for navigation.
Recommendation Engines: ML recommendation engines suggest products, movies, or content based on user behavior. Online retailers use them to improve shopping experiences.
Robotic Process Automation (RPA): RPA uses AI to automate repetitive tasks and reduce manual work.
Automated Stock Trading: AI-driven trading platforms make rapid trades to optimize stock portfolios without human intervention.
Fraud Detection: Machine learning identifies suspicious financial transactions, which help banks to detect fraud and prevent unauthorized activities.
Who can Learn Machine Learning?
Thismachine learning tutorialhas been prepared for those who want to learn about the basics and advances of Machine Learning. In a broader sense; ML is a subset of Artificial Intelligence (AI) that focuses on developing algorithms and models that allow computers to learn from data and make predictions or decisions without being explicitly programmed to do so. Machine learning requires data. This data can be text, images, audio, numbers, or video. The quality and quantity of data considerably affect machine learning model performance. Features are data qualities used to predict or decide. Feature selection and engineering entail selecting and formatting the most relevant features for the model.
Prerequisites to Learn Machine Learning
You should have a basic understanding of the technical aspects of Machine Learning. Learners should be familiar with data, information, and its basics. Knowledge of Data, information, structured data, unstructured data, semi-structured data, data processing, and Artificial Intelligence basics; Proficiency in labeled / unlabelled data, feature extraction from data, and their application in ML to solve common problems is a must.

Home
Basics
Python Ecosystem
Methods for Machine Learning
Data Loading for ML Projects
Understanding Data with Statistics
Understanding Data with Visualization
Preparing Data
Data Feature Selection
ML Algorithms - Classification
Introduction
Logistic Regression
Support Vector Machine (SVM)
Decision Tree
Naïve Bayes
Random Forest
ML Algorithms - Regression
Random Forest
Linear Regression
ML Algorithms - Clustering
Overview
K-means Algorithm
Mean Shift Algorithm
Hierarchical Clustering
ML Algorithms - KNN Algorithm
Finding Nearest Neighbors
Performance Metrics
Automatic Workflows
Improving Performance of ML Models
Improving Performance of ML Model (Contd…)
ML With Python - Resources
Machine Learning With Python - Quick Guide
Machine Learning with Python - Resources
Machine Learning With Python - Discussion
Selected Reading
UPSC IAS Exams Notes
Developer's Best Practices
Questions and Answers
Effective Resume Writing
AI Based Resume Builder
Personal AI Study Assistant
Generate Coding Logic
HR Interview Questions
Computer Glossary
Who is Who
Machine Learning with Python Tutorial
Machine Learning with Python Tutorial
Machine Learning (ML) is basically that field of computer science with the help of which computer systems can provide sense to data in much the same way as human beings do. In simple words, ML is a type of artificial intelligence that extract patterns out of raw data by using an algorithm or method. The key focus of ML is to allow computer systems to learn from experience without being explicitly programmed or human intervention.
Audience
This tutorial will be useful for graduates, postgraduates, and research students who either have an interest in this subject or have this subject as a part of their curriculum. The reader can be a beginner or an advanced learner. This tutorial has been prepared for the students as well as professionals to ramp up quickly. This tutorial is a stepping stone to your Machine Learning journey.
Prerequisites
The reader must have basic knowledge of Artificial Intelligence. They should have a good knowledge of Python and some of its libraries such as NumPy, Pandas, Scikit-learn, Scipy and Matplotlib for effective data manipulation and analysis.
In addition, the readers should have a strong understanding of the fundamental concepts in mathematics including calculus, linear algebra, probability, statistics, algorithms and data structures.
If you are new to any of these concepts, we recommend you to take up tutorials concerning these topics, before you dig further into this tutorial
Frequently Asked Questions about ML with Python
There are some very Frequently Asked Questions(FAQ) about ML with Python. In this section, we will have some of these FAQs answered −
Machine learning (ML) is a subset of artificial intelligence (AI) that focuses on developing algorithms that improve automatically through experience and by using the hidden patterns of the data.
In simple terms, ML enables computers to learn from data and make predictions or decisions without being explicitly programmed. This capability allows computers to automate tasks and solve complex problems across different fields.
The amount of data generated by businesses and individuals continues to grow at an exponential rate. Machine learning has become an important topic as it revolutionizes how computers process and interpret data.
ML empowers computers to learn from data, enhancing accuracy and efficiency in various tasks. It enables data-driven decision-making and boosts productivity.
Different types of Machine Learning include −
Supervised Learning− In supervised learning, the algorithm is trained on labeled data i.e., the correct answer or output is provided for each input.
Unsupervised Learning− In unsupervised learning, the algorithm is trained on unlabeled data i.e., the correct output or answer is not provided for each input.
Reinforcement Learning− In reinforcement learning, the algorithm learns by receiving feedback in the form of rewards or punishments based on its actions.
Semi-supervised Learning− In semi-supervised learning, the algorithm is trained on combined labeled and unlabeled data.
Some of the common applications of Machine Learning include −
Recommendation systems for personalized content.
Image and speech recognition for authentication and security.
Natural language processing for sentiment analysis and chatbots.
Predictive analytics for forecasting sales and trends.
Autonomous vehicles for navigation and decision-making.
Fraud detection in the banking sector and finance.
Medical diagnosis and healthcare management.
Virtual assistants for customer service and support.
The basic components of a Machine Learning system −
Data− It is the raw information used to train and test the model.
Model− It is a mathematical representation that learns from the input data.
Features− These are the input variables or attributes used by the model to make predictions.
Training− Process of feeding data into the model to make accurate predictions by adjusting its internal parameters.
Evaluation− Process of assessing the performance of model on separate dataset.
Prediction− Process of using the trained model to make predictions on new data.
Some of the commonly used programming languages in Machine Learning include Python, R, Java, C++, Julia, and JavaScript.
Python, due to its simplicity and extensive libraries like TensorFlow, Keras, Scikit-learn, and OpenCV is the preferred choice for both beginners as well as experts in the field of machine learning.
In supervised learning, an algorithm is trained using the labeled data to find the relationship between the input variables and the desired output. On the other hand, in unsupervised learning, an algorithm is trained using unlabeled data to find the structure and patterns from the input data.
Supervised learning can be used forclassificationandregressionwhile unsupervised learning can be used forclustering and dimensionality reduction.
Here is a list of some popular algorithms used in Machine Learning −
Linear Regression
Logistic Regression
Decision Trees
Random Forests
Support Vector Machines (SVM)
k-Nearest Neighbors (k-NN)
Naive Bayes
Gradient Boosting Machines (GBM)
K-Means Clustering
Hierarchical Clustering
For classification tasks, we can evaluate the performance of a Machine Learning model using various metrics such asaccuracy, precision, recall, F1-score, andarea under the ROC curve (AUC-ROC).
For regression tasks, we can use metrics likemean squared error (MSE), root mean squared error (RMSE), andR-squared. Cross-validation techniques like k-fold cross-validation can also help assessing generalization performance of a ML model.
Some common challenges and issues faced in Machine Learning include overfitting, underfitting, data quality, imbalanced datasets, computational complexity, model interpretability, generalization, scalability, and ethical considerations like fairness and privacy protection.
To get started with ML, first learn Python programming language which is widely used in the field. Understand some ML concepts like supervised and unsupervised learning, algorithms, and evaluation metrics.
To implement ML models, it is good to learn popular libraries like scikit-learn and TensorFlow. You can practice by working on projects using datasets from platforms like Kaggle.
You can also take some online courses to gain practical experience. Finally, build your own ML projects to apply your knowledge.
Machine learning models can raise ethical considerations when used to make decisions affecting people's lives. These considerations include bias and fairness, privacy, transparency, accountability, data security, consent, societal impact, and regulatory compliance.
To ensure a reliable development and deployment of machine learning systems, considering these aspects are important.
Machine Learning (ML) and Artificial Intelligence (AI) are two closely related but different domains withing computer science. AI is a field of computer science that makes computers mimic human intelligence.
On the other hand, ML is a subset of AI that focuses on algorithms that allow computers to learn from data and make predictions or decisions without being explicitly programmed to do so.
Machine Learning can be applied to various types of data such as numerical, categorical, text, image, and audio data. But the effectiveness of Machine Learning techniques depends on the quality and characteristics of the data.
For example, supervised learning algorithms require labeled data for training, while unsupervised learning techniques require unlabeled data.
To collect and prepare data for Machine Learning, start by defining the problem and gathering relevant data from various sources. Next, clean the dataset by removing duplicates and handling missing values. Now, Analyze the dataset to understand its structure and relationships between variables.
Next, prepare the data for input into ML models by using techniques like normalization and scaling. Now, divide the dataset into training and testing sets for model evaluation. Finally, iterate on the data preparation process based on model performance.
Some common tools and libraries used in Machine Learning projects include Python programming language (with libraries likeTensorFlow, Scikit-learn, PyTorch, Kerasetc.), R programming language (with libraries likecaret, mlr, etc.), Jupyter Notebooks, NumPy, Pandas, Matplotlib, Seaborn, and XGBoost.
These tools enable data manipulation, visualization, model development, and evaluation and hence play a fundamental role in ML workflow.
To choose the right Machine Learning algorithm, you first need to understand your problem and analyze the characteristics of your data.
For example, if you want to categorize new observations, you may need to use classification techniques, while if you want to analyze relationship between dependent and independent variables, you may need to use regression techniques.
Deep Learning (DL) is a subset of Machine Learning (ML) that uses neural networks with multiple layers to learn hierarchical representations of data. It relates to ML as it falls withing the broader field of ML.
While ML uses various algorithms to teach computers to learn from data, DL focuses on using deep neural networks to learn complex patterns and relationships in large data sets.
To train a Machine Learning model, first clean, preprocess and split the data into training and testing sets. Next, choose an appropriate algorithm or model architecture. Now, train it on the training data by adjusting parameters to minimize error.
Once trained, validate the models performance on a separate dataset, Finally, evaluate the models performance on testing data and deploy the model for predictions on new data.
To deploy a Machine Learning model into production first choose a suitable platform for hosting the model. Next, implement a pipeline for model deployment which includes preprocessing, prediction, and post-processing steps.
Next, we need to validate the deployed model's performance and functionality. Once validated, continuously monitor the model's performance in production. Finally, if needed, scale the deployment to handle increasing workload and demand efficiently.

Home
Adjusted R-Squared
Analysis of Variance
Arithmetic Mean
Arithmetic Median
Arithmetic Mode
Arithmetic Range
Bar Graph
Best Point Estimation
Beta Distribution
Binomial Distribution
Black-Scholes model
Boxplots
Central limit theorem
Chebyshev's Theorem
Chi-squared Distribution
Chi Squared table
Circular Permutation
Cluster sampling
Cohen's kappa coefficient
Combination
Combination with replacement
Comparing plots
Continuous Uniform Distribution
Continuous Series Arithmetic Mean
Continuous Series Arithmetic Median
Continuous Series Arithmetic Mode
Cumulative Frequency
Co-efficient of Variation
Correlation Co-efficient
Cumulative plots
Cumulative Poisson Distribution
Data collection
Data collection - Questionaire Designing
Data collection - Observation
Data collection - Case Study Method
Data Patterns
Deciles Statistics
Discrete Series Arithmetic Mean
Discrete Series Arithmetic Median
Discrete Series Arithmetic Mode
Dot Plot
Exponential distribution
F distribution
F Test Table
Factorial
Frequency Distribution
Gamma Distribution
Geometric Mean
Geometric Probability Distribution
Goodness of Fit
Grand Mean
Gumbel Distribution
Harmonic Mean
Harmonic Number
Harmonic Resonance Frequency
Histograms
Hypergeometric Distribution
Hypothesis testing
Individual Series Arithmetic Mean
Individual Series Arithmetic Median
Individual Series Arithmetic Mode
Interval Estimation
Inverse Gamma Distribution
Kolmogorov Smirnov Test
Kurtosis
Laplace Distribution
Linear regression
Log Gamma Distribution
Logistic Regression
Mcnemar Test
Mean Deviation
Means Difference
Multinomial Distribution
Negative Binomial Distribution
Normal Distribution
Odd and Even Permutation
One Proportion Z Test
Outlier Function
Permutation
Permutation with Replacement
Pie Chart
Poisson Distribution
Pooled Variance (r)
Power Calculator
Probability
Probability Additive Theorem
Probability Multiplecative Theorem
Probability Bayes Theorem
Probability Density Function
Process Capability (Cp) & Process Performance (Pp)Process SigmaQuadratic Regression EquationQualitative Data Vs Quantitative DataQuartile DeviationRange Rule of ThumbRayleigh DistributionRegression Intercept Confidence IntervalRelative Standard DeviationReliability CoefficientRequired Sample SizeResidual analysisResidual sum of squaresRoot Mean SquareSample planningSampling methodsScatterplotsShannon Wiener Diversity IndexSignal to Noise RatioSimple random samplingSkewnessStandard DeviationStandard Error ( SE )Standard normal tableStatistical SignificanceStatistics FormulasStatistics NotationStem and Leaf PlotStratified samplingStudent T TestSum of SquareT-Distribution TableTi 83 Exponential RegressionTransformationsTrimmed MeanType I & II ErrorVarianceVenn DiagramWeak Law of Large NumbersZ tableStatistics Useful ResourcesStatistics - Discussion
Process Sigma
Quadratic Regression Equation
Qualitative Data Vs Quantitative Data
Quartile Deviation
Range Rule of Thumb
Rayleigh Distribution
Regression Intercept Confidence Interval
Relative Standard Deviation
Reliability Coefficient
Required Sample Size
Residual analysis
Residual sum of squares
Root Mean Square
Sample planning
Sampling methods
Scatterplots
Shannon Wiener Diversity Index
Signal to Noise Ratio
Simple random sampling
Skewness
Standard Deviation
Standard Error ( SE )
Standard normal table
Statistical Significance
Statistics Formulas
Statistics Notation
Stem and Leaf Plot
Stratified sampling
Student T Test
Sum of Square
T-Distribution Table
Ti 83 Exponential Regression
Transformations
Trimmed Mean
Type I & II Error
Variance
Venn Diagram
Weak Law of Large Numbers
Z table
Statistics Useful Resources
Statistics - Discussion
Selected Reading
UPSC IAS Exams Notes
Developer's Best Practices
Questions and Answers
Effective Resume Writing
AI Based Resume Builder
Personal AI Study Assistant
Generate Coding Logic
HR Interview Questions
Computer Glossary
Who is Who
Statistics Tutorial
This Statistics preparation material will cover the important concepts of Statistics syllabus. It contains chapters discussing all the basic concepts of Statistics with suitable examples.
Audience
This tutorial is designed for Professionals who are willing to learn Statistics and want to clear B.A., B.Sc., B.COM,  M.COM and other exams. This tutorial will give you great understanding on concepts present in Statistics syllabus and after completing this preparation material you will be at intermediate level of experties from where you can take yourself at higher level of expertise.
Prerequisites
Before proceeding with this tutorial you should have a basic understanding of Mathematics.

NLP - Home
NLP - Introduction
NLP - Linguistic Resources
NLP - Word Level Analysis
NLP - Syntactic Analysis
NLP - Semantic Analysis
NLP - Word Sense Disambiguation
NLP - Discourse Processing
NLP - Part of Speech (PoS) Tagging
NLP - Inception
NLP - Information Retrieval
NLP - Applications of NLP
NLP - Python
Natural Language Processing Resources
NLP - Quick Guide
NLP - Useful Resources
NLP - Discussion
Selected Reading
UPSC IAS Exams Notes
Developer's Best Practices
Questions and Answers
Effective Resume Writing
AI Based Resume Builder
Personal AI Study Assistant
Generate Coding Logic
HR Interview Questions
Computer Glossary
Who is Who
Natural Language Processing Tutorial
Language is a method of communication with the help of which we can speak, read and write. Natural Language Processing (NLP) is a subfield of Computer Science that deals with Artificial Intelligence (AI), which enables computers to understand and process human language.
Audience
This tutorial is designed to benefit graduates, postgraduates, and research students who either have an interest in this subject or have this subject as a part of their curriculum. The reader can be a beginner or an advanced learner.
Prerequisites
The reader must have basic knowledge about Artificial Intelligence. He/she should also be aware about basic terminologies used in English grammar and Python programming concepts.

Artificial Neural Network - Home
Basic Concepts
Building Blocks
Learning & Adaptation
Supervised Learning
Unsupervised Learning
Learning Vector Quantization
Adaptive Resonance Theory
Kohonen Self-Organizing Feature Maps
Associate Memory Network
Hopfield Networks
Boltzmann Machine
Brain-State-in-a-Box Network
Optimization Using Hopfield Network
Other Optimization Techniques
Genetic Algorithm
Applications of Neural Networks
Quick Guide
Useful Resources
Discussion
Selected Reading
UPSC IAS Exams Notes
Developer's Best Practices
Questions and Answers
Effective Resume Writing
AI Based Resume Builder
Personal AI Study Assistant
Generate Coding Logic
HR Interview Questions
Computer Glossary
Who is Who
Artificial Neural Networks Tutorial
Artificial Neural Networks are parallel computing devices, which are basically an attempt to make a computer model of the brain. The main objective is to develop a system to perform various computational tasks faster than the traditional systems. This tutorial covers the basic concept and terminologies involved in Artificial Neural Network. Sections of this tutorial also explain the architecture as well as the training algorithm of various networks used in ANN.
Audience
This tutorial will be useful for graduates, post graduates, and research students who either have an interest in this subject or have this subject as a part of their curriculum. The reader can be a beginner or an advanced learner.
Prerequisites
Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) is an advanced topic, hence the reader must have basic knowledge of Algorithms, Programming, and Mathematics.

TensorFlow - Home
TensorFlow - Introduction
TensorFlow - Installation
Understanding Artificial Intelligence
Mathematical Foundations
Machine Learning & Deep Learning
TensorFlow - Basics
Convolutional Neural Networks
Recurrent Neural Networks
TensorBoard Visualization
TensorFlow - Word Embedding
Single Layer Perceptron
TensorFlow - Linear Regression
TFLearn and its installation
CNN and RNN Difference
TensorFlow - Keras
TensorFlow - Distributed Computing
TensorFlow - Exporting
Multi-Layer Perceptron Learning
Hidden Layers of Perceptron
TensorFlow - Optimizers
TensorFlow - XOR Implementation
Gradient Descent Optimization
TensorFlow - Forming Graphs
Image Recognition using TensorFlow
Recommendations for Neural Network Training
TensorFlow - Quick Guide
TensorFlow - Useful Resources
TensorFlow - Discussion
Selected Reading
UPSC IAS Exams Notes
Developer's Best Practices
Questions and Answers
Effective Resume Writing
AI Based Resume Builder
Personal AI Study Assistant
Generate Coding Logic
HR Interview Questions
Computer Glossary
Who is Who
TensorFlow Tutorial
TensorFlow is an open source machine learning framework for all developers. It is used for implementing machine learning and deep learning applications. To develop and research on fascinating ideas on artificial intelligence, Google team created TensorFlow. TensorFlow is designed in Python programming language, hence it is considered an easy to understand framework.
Audience
This tutorial has been prepared for python developers who focus on research and development with various machine learning and deep learning algorithms. The aim of this tutorial is to describe all TensorFlow objects and methods.
Prerequisites
Before proceeding with this tutorial, you need to have a basic knowledge of any Python programming language. Knowledge of artificial intelligence concepts will be a plus point.

PyTorch - Home
PyTorch - Introduction
PyTorch - Installation
Mathematical Building Blocks of Neural Networks
PyTorch - Neural Network Basics
Universal Workflow of Machine Learning
Machine Learning vs. Deep Learning
Implementing First Neural Network
Neural Networks to Functional Blocks
PyTorch - Terminologies
PyTorch - Loading Data
PyTorch - Linear Regression
PyTorch - Convolutional Neural Network
PyTorch - Recurrent Neural Network
PyTorch - Datasets
PyTorch - Introduction to Convents
Training a Convent from Scratch
PyTorch - Feature Extraction in Convents
PyTorch - Visualization of Convents
Sequence Processing with Convents
PyTorch - Word Embedding
PyTorch - Recursive Neural Networks
PyTorch Useful Resources
PyTorch - Quick Guide
PyTorch - Useful Resources
PyTorch - Discussion
Selected Reading
UPSC IAS Exams Notes
Developer's Best Practices
Questions and Answers
Effective Resume Writing
AI Based Resume Builder
Personal AI Study Assistant
Generate Coding Logic
HR Interview Questions
Computer Glossary
Who is Who
PyTorch Tutorial
PyTorch is an open source machine learning library for Python and is completely based on Torch. It is primarily used for applications such as natural language processing. PyTorch is developed by Facebook's artificial-intelligence research group along with Uber's "Pyro" software for the concept of in-built probabilistic programming.
Audience
This tutorial has been prepared for python developers who focus on research and development with machinelearning algorithms along with natural language processing system. The aim of this tutorial is to completely describe all concepts of PyTorch and realworld examples of the same.
Prerequisites
Before proceeding with this tutorial, you need knowledge of Python and Anaconda framework (commands used in Anaconda). Having knowledge of artificial intelligence concepts will be an added advantage.

Matplotlib - Home
Matplotlib - Introduction
Matplotlib - Vs Seaborn
Matplotlib - Environment Setup
Matplotlib - Anaconda distribution
Matplotlib - Jupyter Notebook
Matplotlib - Pyplot API
Matplotlib - Simple Plot
Matplotlib - Saving Figures
Matplotlib - Markers
Matplotlib - Figures
Matplotlib - Styles
Matplotlib - Legends
Matplotlib - Colors
Matplotlib - Colormaps
Matplotlib - Colormap Normalization
Matplotlib - Choosing Colormaps
Matplotlib - Colorbars
Matplotlib - Working With Text
Matplotlib - Text properties
Matplotlib - Subplot Titles
Matplotlib - Images
Matplotlib - Image Masking
Matplotlib - Annotations
Matplotlib - Arrows
Matplotlib - Fonts
Matplotlib - Font Indexing
Matplotlib - Font Properties
Matplotlib - Scales
Matplotlib - LaTeX
Matplotlib - LaTeX Text Formatting in Annotations
Matplotlib - PostScript
Matplotlib - Mathematical Expressions
Matplotlib - Animations
Matplotlib - Celluloid Library
Matplotlib - Blitting
Matplotlib - Toolkits
Matplotlib - Artists
Matplotlib - Styling with Cycler
Matplotlib - Paths
Matplotlib - Path Effects
Matplotlib - Transforms
Matplotlib - Ticks and Tick Labels
Matplotlib - Radian Ticks
Matplotlib - Dateticks
Matplotlib - Tick Formatters
Matplotlib - Tick Locators
Matplotlib - Basic Units
Matplotlib - Autoscaling
Matplotlib - Reverse Axes
Matplotlib - Logarithmic Axes
Matplotlib - Symlog
Matplotlib - Unit Handling
Matplotlib - Ellipse with Units
Matplotlib - Spines
Matplotlib - Axis Ranges
Matplotlib - Axis Scales
Matplotlib - Axis Ticks
Matplotlib - Formatting Axes
Matplotlib - Axes Class
Matplotlib - Twin Axes
Matplotlib - Figure Class
Matplotlib - Multiplots
Matplotlib - Grids
Matplotlib - Object-oriented Interface
Matplotlib - PyLab module
Matplotlib - Subplots() Function
Matplotlib - Subplot2grid() Function
Matplotlib - Anchored Artists
Matplotlib - Manual Contour
Matplotlib - Coords Report
Matplotlib - AGG filter
Matplotlib - Ribbon Box
Matplotlib - Fill Spiral
Matplotlib - Findobj Demo
Matplotlib - Hyperlinks
Matplotlib - Image Thumbnail
Matplotlib - Plotting with Keywords
Matplotlib - Create Logo
Matplotlib - Multipage PDF
Matplotlib - Multiprocessing
Matplotlib - Print Stdout
Matplotlib - Compound Path
Matplotlib - Sankey Class
Matplotlib - MRI with EEG
Matplotlib - Stylesheets
Matplotlib - Background Colors
Matplotlib - Basemap
Matplotlib - Event Handling
Matplotlib - Close Event
Matplotlib - Mouse Move
Matplotlib - Click Events
Matplotlib - Scroll Event
Matplotlib - Keypress Event
Matplotlib - Pick Event
Matplotlib - Looking Glass
Matplotlib - Path Editor
Matplotlib - Poly Editor
Matplotlib - Timers
Matplotlib - Viewlims
Matplotlib - Zoom Window
Matplotlib Widgets
Matplotlib - Cursor Widget
Matplotlib - Annotated Cursor
Matplotlib - Buttons Widget
Matplotlib - Check Buttons
Matplotlib - Lasso Selector
Matplotlib - Menu Widget
Matplotlib - Mouse Cursor
Matplotlib - Multicursor
Matplotlib - Polygon Selector
Matplotlib - Radio Buttons
Matplotlib - RangeSlider
Matplotlib - Rectangle Selector
Matplotlib - Ellipse Selector
Matplotlib - Slider Widget
Matplotlib - Span Selector
Matplotlib - Textbox
Matplotlib Plotting
Matplotlib - Line Plots
Matplotlib - Area Plots
Matplotlib - Bar Graphs
Matplotlib - Histogram
Matplotlib - Pie Chart
Matplotlib - Scatter Plot
Matplotlib - Box Plot
Matplotlib - Arrow Demo
Matplotlib - Fancy Boxes
Matplotlib - Zorder Demo
Matplotlib - Hatch Demo
Matplotlib - Mmh Donuts
Matplotlib - Ellipse Demo
Matplotlib - Bezier Curve
Matplotlib - Bubble Plots
Matplotlib - Stacked Plots
Matplotlib - Table Charts
Matplotlib - Polar Charts
Matplotlib - Hexagonal bin Plots
Matplotlib - Violin Plot
Matplotlib - Event Plot
Matplotlib - Heatmap
Matplotlib - Stairs Plots
Matplotlib - Errorbar
Matplotlib - Hinton Diagram
Matplotlib - Contour Plot
Matplotlib - Wireframe Plots
Matplotlib - Surface Plots
Matplotlib - Triangulations
Matplotlib - Stream plot
Matplotlib - Ishikawa Diagram
Matplotlib - 3D Plotting
Matplotlib - 3D Lines
Matplotlib - 3D Scatter Plots
Matplotlib - 3D Contour Plot
Matplotlib - 3D Bar Plots
Matplotlib - 3D Wireframe Plot
Matplotlib - 3D Surface Plot
Matplotlib - 3D Vignettes
Matplotlib - 3D Volumes
Matplotlib - 3D Voxels
Matplotlib - Time Plots and Signals
Matplotlib - Filled Plots
Matplotlib - Step Plots
Matplotlib - XKCD Style
Matplotlib - Quiver Plot
Matplotlib - Stem Plots
Matplotlib - Visualizing Vectors
Matplotlib - Audio Visualization
Matplotlib - Audio Processing
Matplotlib Useful Resources
Matplotlib - Quick Guide
Matplotlib - Cheatsheet
Matplotlib - Useful Resources
Matplotlib - Discussion
Selected Reading
UPSC IAS Exams Notes
Developer's Best Practices
Questions and Answers
Effective Resume Writing
AI Based Resume Builder
Personal AI Study Assistant
Generate Coding Logic
HR Interview Questions
Computer Glossary
Who is Who
Matplotlib Tutorial
What is Matplotlib?
Matplotlib and Pyplot
Online Editor
Applications of Matplotlib
Why To Learn Matplotlib?
Who Should Learn Matplotlib
Prerequisites to Learn Matplotlib
Frequently Asked Questions about Matplotlib
What Is Matplotlib?
Matplotlibis one of the most popular Python packages used for data visualization. It is a cross-platform library for making 2D plots from data in arrays. It provides an object-oriented API that helps in embedding plots in applications using Python GUI toolkits such asPyQt,WxPython, orTkinter. It can be used in Python and IPython shells,Jupyter notebookand web application servers also.
Matplotlib is aPythonlibrary that is specifically designed to do effective data visualization. It's a cornerstone of plotting libraries in Python which empowers beginners to dive into the world of attractive data visualization. Matplotlib is an open-source Python library that offers various data visualization (like Line plots, histograms, scatter plots, bar charts, Scatter plots, Pie Charts, and Area Plot etc). A beauty of the Python matplotlib library is its Python code. Its script is structured which denotes that a few lines of code are all that are required in most instances to generate a visual data plot.
Matplotlib and Pyplot
Matplotlibis a versatile toolkit that allows for the creation of static, animated, and interactive visualizations in the Python programming language.
Generally, matplotlib overlays two APIs:
The pyplot API: to make plot usingmatplotlib.pyplot.
Object-Oriented API: A group of objects assembled with greater flexibility thanpyplot. It provides direct access to Matplotlib’s backend layers.
Matplotlib simplifies simple tasks and enables complex tasks to be accomplished. Following are the key aspects of matplotlib:
Matplotlib offers to create quality plots.
Matplotlib offers interactive figures and customizes their visual style that can be manipulated as per need.
Matplotlib offers export to many file formats.
Online Editor
We have provided anOnline Python Compiler/Interpreter. Which helps you  toEditandExecutethe Python code directly from your browser. You can also execute the Matplotlib programs using this.
Try to click the iconto run the following matplotlib code to display a basic line plot.
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import numpy as np

x = np.linspace(0, 2 * np.pi, 200)
y = np.sin(x)

fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=(7, 4))
ax.set_title('Sin Wave')
ax.plot(x, y)
plt.show()
Applications of Matplotlib
The most common applications of matplotlib include:
Data Visualization: Many scientific researches, data analytics, andmachine learningapplications use Matplotlib to visualize data.
Scientific Research: Matplotlib helps scientists visualize experimental data, simulation findings, and statistical analysis. It improves data comprehension and communication for researchers.
Engineering: Matplotlib helps engineers to visualize sensor readings, simulation findings, and design parameters. It excels at graphing in mechanical, civil, aeronautical, and electrical engineering.
Finance: Finance professionals use Matplotlib to visualize stock prices, market trends, portfolio performance, and risk assessments. It helps analysts and traders make decisions by visualizing complicated financial data in simple graphics.
Geospatial Analysis: Matplotlib, Basemap, and Cartopy are used to visualize geographical data such as maps, satellite images, climate data, and GIS data. Users may generate interactive maps, plot geographical characteristics, and overlay data for spatial analysis.
Biology and Bioinformatics: Matplotlib helps biologists and bioinformaticians visualize DNA sequences, protein structures, phylogenetic trees, and gene expression patterns. It helps researchers to visualize complicated biological processes.
Education: Educational institutions use Matplotlib to teach data visualization, programming, and scientific computing. Its easy-to-use visualization interface makes it suited for high school and university students and teachers.
Web Development:Flask,Django, andPlotlyDash can incorporate Matplotlib into online apps. It lets developers build dynamic, interactive visualizations for web pages and dashboards.
Machine Learning: Machine learning projects visualize data distributions, model performance metrics, decision boundaries, and training progress with Matplotlib. It helps machine learning practitioners analyze algorithm behavior and troubleshoot model-building concerns.
Presentation and Publication: Matplotlib creates high-quality figures for scientific research, reports, presentations, and posters. It offers many customization options to optimize the plot look for publishing and presentation.
Matplotlib lets users produce informative and attractive visualizations for analysis, communication, and decision-making.
Why To Learn Matplotlib?
Matplotlibis a comprehensive library for creating static, animated, and interactive visualizations in Python. It has become one of the most widely used plotting libraries in the Python ecosystem. Some of the reasons are as to make Matplotlib popular:
Plotting Capabilities: Matplotlib provides extensive functionality for creating a variety of plots like line plots, scatter plots, bar charts, histograms, pie charts, 3D plots, etc.
Quality Graphics: It allows its users to control every aspect of their plots, including colors, line styles, markers, fonts, and annotations.Integration with NumPy and Pandas: Matplotlib works with NumPy and Pandas to visualize arrays, data frames, and other data structures.
Cross-Platform Compatibility: Matplotlib operates on Windows, macOS, and Linux, making it accessible to many people.
Extensive Documentation and Tutorials: Beginners and experts may easily get started with Matplotlib thanks to its extensive documentation and online training.
Matplotlib is a robust and versatile Python toolkit used for visualizing data which makes it indispensable for data analysts, scientists, engineers, and other professionals working with data.
Who Should Learn Matplotlib?
ThisMatplotlib tutorialhas been prepared for those who want to learn about the foundations and advances of theMatplotlib Python package. It is most widely used in the domains of data science, engineering, research, agriculture science, management, statistics, and other related fields where data visualization primarily requires finding data insights using charts and graphs to understand the data patterns. It really helps the companies in strategic decision-making.
ThisMatplotlib tutorialis designed for beginners and professionals to cover matplotlib concepts, including the process of installing matplotlib and making different plots. It offers a detailed description, valuable insights, and the fundamental principles of constructing attractive visualizations. Whether you are a student embarking in the field of data science or a professional, this tutorial provides a strong foundation to explore data analysis using data visualization through Matplotlib to present the data. Hence, this tutorial aims to explain the different functions of Matplotlib for data analysis.
Prerequisites To Learn Matplotlib
You should have a basic understanding of computer programming. A basic understanding of Python and any of the programming languages is a plus. Basic knowledge of statistics and mathematics is helpful for data analysis and interpretation. Matplotlib offers functions for data visualization. By having a strong foundation of above mentioned, you'll be well-equipped to leverage the power of matplotlib for data visualization.
Frequently Asked Questions about Matplotlib
There are some very Frequently Asked Questions(FAQ) about SQL, this section tries to answer them briefly.
Matplotlib is used for creating static, animated, and interactive visualizations in Python. It's a powerful library widely used for data visualization tasks, offering various functionalities to generate plots such as line plots, scatter plots, bar charts, histograms, and 3D plots.
Because of its nomenclature for plots and the two plotting interfaces: the pyplot approach and the object-oriented style. These aspects may initially challenge the users who are trying to understand the library.
The name Matplotlib originated from the library's early goal of emulating the MATLAB graphics commands. However, it's important to note that Matplotlib is independent of MATLAB and can be used in a Pythonic, object-oriented manner.
It offers a wide range of functionalities to create plots like line plots, scatter plots, bar charts, histograms, 3D plots, and much more. Due to its accessibility, Matplotlib is recognized as one of the most popular data visualization tools.
Matplotlib is helpful because it simplifies the process of creating plots and visualizing data. It allows users to generate plots with just a few commands, making it accessible for both beginners and experienced programmers.
Matplotlib offers several advantages few of them are listed below −
Efficient Data Access
Efficient Data Access
Robust Data Handling
Robust Data Handling
Creates publication-quality plots
Creates publication-quality plots
Support for Multiple Outputs
Support for Multiple Outputs
It also provides graphical user interfaces
It also provides graphical user interfaces
Flexible Data Representation
Flexible Data Representation
Advanced Visualization Capabilities
Advanced Visualization Capabilities
Open-Source Nature
Open-Source Nature
Simplifies data analysis by providing a user-friendly interface and powerful tools
Simplifies data analysis by providing a user-friendly interface and powerful tools
It provides high-quality images
It provides high-quality images
Matplotlib is used by persons in various fields, including data science, finance, engineering, and research. Particularly used within the data science industries. Its flexibility and capability to handle complex data visualization tasks make it a popular choice among individuals working with data.
Matplotlib was originally written by John D. Hunter, a neurobiologist, with the initial goal of emulating MATLAB's plotting capabilities to work with EEG data. then it has had an active development community and is distributed under a BSD-style license.
Learning Matplotlib involves exploring its simple and advanced commands. You can start by following tutorials and examples, gradually building confidence in creating plots for data visualization. Our comprehensive learning materials provide a solid foundation for mastering Matplotlib. Also, it is good to follow the Official Documentation.
Yes, Matplotlib is a powerful library for data visualization in Python. It allows users to create a variety of plots, charts, and graphs to effectively represent and analyze data.
There are two main approaches to using Matplotlib: the pyplot approach (also known as An implicit or functional interface) and the object-oriented style (called An explicit or Axes interface).
Matplotlib provides benefits such as the ability to create high-quality plots, compatibility with various output formats, ease of integration into graphical user interfaces, and support LaTeX and math text, allowing users to display mathematical equations and symbols in their plots, such as axis labels, titles, and annotations.
Matplotlib supports various types of histograms, including bar charts, stacked bar charts, and 3D histograms.
You can use our simple and the best Matplotlib tutorial to learn Matplotlib. Our tutorial offers an excellent starting point for learning Matplotlib. You can explore our simple and effective learning materials at your own pace.
Matplotlib's architecture consists of three layers −
Backend Layer− This layer is responsible for handling the display of Matplotlib figures.
Backend Layer− This layer is responsible for handling the display of Matplotlib figures.
Artist Layer− The Artist layer is crucial in the creation and manipulation of visual elements within Matplotlib. Each visual component, such as lines, text, and shapes, is represented as an "artist" in this layer.
Artist Layer− The Artist layer is crucial in the creation and manipulation of visual elements within Matplotlib. Each visual component, such as lines, text, and shapes, is represented as an "artist" in this layer.
Scripting Layer− The Scripting layer is where users interact with Matplotlib to generate visualizations using Python scripts or code.
Scripting Layer− The Scripting layer is where users interact with Matplotlib to generate visualizations using Python scripts or code.
The Matplotlib font refers to the text appearance in plots generated using Matplotlib. The library provides robust support for customizing text properties in plots. By default, Matplotlib uses the DejaVu Sans font. However, users have the flexibility to configure default fonts and even use their custom fonts.

NumPy - Home
NumPy - Introduction
NumPy - Environment
NumPy Arrays
NumPy - Ndarray Object
NumPy - Data Types
NumPy Creating and Manipulating Arrays
NumPy - Array Creation Routines
NumPy - Array Manipulation
NumPy - Array from Existing Data
NumPy - Array From Numerical Ranges
NumPy - Iterating Over Array
NumPy - Reshaping Arrays
NumPy - Concatenating Arrays
NumPy - Stacking Arrays
NumPy - Splitting Arrays
NumPy - Flattening Arrays
NumPy - Transposing Arrays
NumPy Indexing & Slicing
NumPy - Indexing & Slicing
NumPy - Indexing
NumPy - Slicing
NumPy - Advanced Indexing
NumPy - Fancy Indexing
NumPy - Field Access
NumPy - Slicing with Boolean Arrays
NumPy Array Attributes & Operations
NumPy - Array Attributes
NumPy - Array Shape
NumPy - Array Size
NumPy - Array Strides
NumPy - Array Itemsize
NumPy - Broadcasting
NumPy - Arithmetic Operations
NumPy - Array Addition
NumPy - Array Subtraction
NumPy - Array Multiplication
NumPy - Array Division
NumPy Advanced Array Operations
NumPy - Swapping Axes of Arrays
NumPy - Byte Swapping
NumPy - Copies & Views
NumPy - Element-wise Array Comparisons
NumPy - Filtering Arrays
NumPy - Joining Arrays
NumPy - Sort, Search & Counting Functions
NumPy - Searching Arrays
NumPy - Union of Arrays
NumPy - Finding Unique Rows
NumPy - Creating Datetime Arrays
NumPy - Binary Operators
NumPy - String Functions
NumPy - Matrix Library
NumPy - Linear Algebra
NumPy - Matplotlib
NumPy - Histogram Using Matplotlib
NumPy Sorting and Advanced Manipulation
NumPy - Sorting Arrays
NumPy - Sorting along an axis
NumPy - Sorting with Fancy Indexing
NumPy - Structured Arrays
NumPy - Creating Structured Arrays
NumPy - Manipulating Structured Arrays
NumPy - Record Arrays
Numpy - Loading Arrays
Numpy - Saving Arrays
NumPy - Append Values to an Array
NumPy - Swap Columns of Array
NumPy - Insert Axes to an Array
NumPy Handling Missing Data
NumPy - Handling Missing Data
NumPy - Identifying Missing Values
NumPy - Removing Missing Data
NumPy - Imputing Missing Data
NumPy Performance Optimization
NumPy - Performance Optimization with Arrays
NumPy - Vectorization with Arrays
NumPy - Memory Layout of Arrays
Numpy Linear Algebra
NumPy - Linear Algebra
NumPy - Matrix Library
NumPy - Matrix Addition
NumPy - Matrix Subtraction
NumPy - Matrix Multiplication
NumPy - Element-wise Matrix Operations
NumPy - Dot Product
NumPy - Matrix Inversion
NumPy - Determinant Calculation
NumPy - Eigenvalues
NumPy - Eigenvectors
NumPy - Singular Value Decomposition
NumPy - Solving Linear Equations
NumPy - Matrix Norms
NumPy Element-wise Matrix Operations
NumPy - Sum
NumPy - Mean
NumPy - Median
NumPy - Min
NumPy - Max
NumPy Set Operations
NumPy - Unique Elements
NumPy - Intersection
NumPy - Union
NumPy - Difference
NumPy Random Number Generation
NumPy - Random Generator
NumPy - Permutations & Shuffling
NumPy - Uniform distribution
NumPy - Normal distribution
NumPy - Binomial distribution
NumPy - Poisson distribution
NumPy - Exponential distribution
NumPy - Rayleigh Distribution
NumPy - Logistic Distribution
NumPy - Pareto Distribution
NumPy - Visualize Distributions With Sea born
NumPy - Matplotlib
NumPy - Multinomial Distribution
NumPy - Chi Square Distribution
NumPy - Zipf Distribution
NumPy File Input & Output
NumPy - I/O with NumPy
NumPy - Reading Data from Files
NumPy - Writing Data to Files
NumPy - File Formats Supported
NumPy Mathematical Functions
NumPy - Mathematical Functions
NumPy - Trigonometric functions
NumPy - Exponential Functions
NumPy - Logarithmic Functions
NumPy - Hyperbolic functions
NumPy - Rounding functions
NumPy Fourier Transforms
NumPy - Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT)
NumPy - Fast Fourier Transform (FFT)
NumPy - Inverse Fourier Transform
NumPy - Fourier Series and Transforms
NumPy - Signal Processing Applications
NumPy - Convolution
NumPy Polynomials
NumPy - Polynomial Representation
NumPy - Polynomial Operations
NumPy - Finding Roots of Polynomials
NumPy - Evaluating Polynomials
NumPy Statistics
NumPy - Statistical Functions
NumPy - Descriptive Statistics
NumPy Datetime
NumPy - Basics of Date and Time
NumPy - Representing Date & Time
NumPy - Date & Time Arithmetic
NumPy - Indexing with Datetime
NumPy - Time Zone Handling
NumPy - Time Series Analysis
NumPy - Working with Time Deltas
NumPy - Handling Leap Seconds
NumPy - Vectorized Operations with Datetimes
NumPy ufunc
NumPy - ufunc Introduction
NumPy - Creating Universal Functions (ufunc)
NumPy - Arithmetic Universal Function (ufunc)
NumPy - Rounding Decimal ufunc
NumPy - Logarithmic Universal Function (ufunc)
NumPy - Summation Universal Function (ufunc)
NumPy - Product Universal Function (ufunc)
NumPy - Difference Universal Function (ufunc)
NumPy - Finding LCM with ufunc
NumPy - ufunc Finding GCD
NumPy - ufunc Trigonometric
NumPy - Hyperbolic ufunc
NumPy - Set Operations ufunc
NumPy Useful Resources
NumPy - Quick Guide
NumPy - Cheatsheet
NumPy - Useful Resources
NumPy - Discussion
NumPy Compiler
Selected Reading
UPSC IAS Exams Notes
Developer's Best Practices
Questions and Answers
Effective Resume Writing
AI Based Resume Builder
Personal AI Study Assistant
Generate Coding Logic
HR Interview Questions
Computer Glossary
Who is Who
NumPy Tutorial
ThisNumPy tutorialprovides detailed information with working examples on various topics, such as creating and manipulating arrays, indexing and slicing arrays, and more. This tutorial is helpful for both beginners and advanced learners.
What is NumPy?
NumPy, short forNumerical Python, is an open-source Python library. It supports multi-dimensional arrays (matrices) and provides a wide range of mathematical functions for array operations. It is used in scientific computing, and in areas like data analysis, machine learning, etc.
Why to Use NumPy?
The following are some of the key reasons to use NumPy:
NumPy provides various math functions for calculations like addition, algebra, and data analysis.
NumPy provides various objects representing arrays and multi-dimensional arrays which can be used to handle large data such as images, sounds, etc.
NumPy also works with other libraries likeSciPy(for scientific computing),Pandas(for data analysis), andscikit-learn(for machine learning).
NumPy is fast and reliable, which makes it a great choice for numerical computing in Python.
NumPy Applications
The following are some common application areas where NumPy is extensively used:
Data Analysis:In Data analysis, while handling data, we can create data (in the form of array objects), filter the data, and perform various operations such as mean, finding the standard deviations, etc.
Machine Learning & AI:Popular machine learning tools likeTensorFlowandPyTorchuse NumPy to manage input data, handle model parameters, and process the output values.
Array Manipulation:NumPy allows you to create, resize, slice, index, stack, split, and combine arrays.
Finance & Economics:NumPy is used for financial analysis, including portfolio optimization, risk assessment, time series analysis, and statistical modelling.
Image & Signal Processing:NumPy helps process and analyze images and signals for various applications.
Data Visualization:NumPy independently does not create visualizations, but it works with libraries likeMatplotlibandSeabornto generate charts and graphs from numerical data.
NumPy Example
The following is an example of Python NumPy:
# Importing NumPy Array
import numpy as np

# Creating an array using np.array() method
arr = np.array([10, 20, 30, 40, 50])

# Printing
print(arr) # Prints [10 20 30 40 50]
NumPy Compiler
To practice the NumPy example, we provided an online compiler. Practice your NumPy programs here:Online NumPy Compiler
NumPy Practice
You can quickly revise and practice the concepts of NumPy using the following:
NumPy Quick Guide
NumPy Cheatsheet
Who can Learn NumPy?
This NumPy tutorial has been prepared for those who want to learn about the basics and functions of NumPy. It is specifically useful in data science, engineering, agriculture science, management, statistics, research, and other related domains where numerical computation is required. After completing this tutorial, you will find yourself at a moderate level of expertise from where you can take yourself to higher levels of expertise.
Prerequisites to Learn NumPy
You should have a basic understanding of computer programming terminologies. A basic understanding of Python and any of the programming languages is a plus.
NumPy Codebase
NumPy's source code can be found at this github repository:https://github.com/numpy/numpy
NumPy Documentation
NumPy's documentation, reference manuals, and user guide can be found at these links:
https://numpy.org/doc/stable/user/absolute_beginners.html
https://numpy.org/devdocs/dev/index.html

Python Pandas - Home
Python Pandas - Introduction
Python Pandas - Environment Setup
Python Pandas - Basics
Python Pandas - Introduction to Data Structures
Python Pandas - Index Objects
Python Pandas - Panel
Python Pandas - Basic Functionality
Python Pandas - Indexing & Selecting Data
Python Pandas - Series
Python Pandas - Series
Python Pandas - Slicing a Series Object
Python Pandas - Attributes of a Series Object
Python Pandas - Arithmetic Operations on Series Object
Python Pandas - Converting Series to Other Objects
Python Pandas - DataFrame
Python Pandas - DataFrame
Python Pandas - Accessing DataFrame
Python Pandas - Slicing a DataFrame Object
Python Pandas - Modifying DataFrame
Python Pandas - Removing Rows from a DataFrame
Python Pandas - Arithmetic Operations on DataFrame
Python Pandas - IO Tools
Python Pandas - IO Tools
Python Pandas - Working with CSV Format
Python Pandas - Reading & Writing JSON Files
Python Pandas - Reading Data from an Excel File
Python Pandas - Writing Data to Excel Files
Python Pandas - Working with HTML Data
Python Pandas - Clipboard
Python Pandas - Working with HDF5 Format
Python Pandas - Comparison with SQL
Python Pandas - Data Handling
Python Pandas - Sorting
Python Pandas - Reindexing
Python Pandas - Iteration
Python Pandas - Concatenation
Python Pandas - Statistical Functions
Python Pandas - Descriptive Statistics
Python Pandas - Working with Text Data
Python Pandas - Function Application
Python Pandas - Options & Customization
Python Pandas - Window Functions
Python Pandas - Aggregations
Python Pandas - Merging/Joining
Python Pandas - MultiIndex
Python Pandas - Basics of MultiIndex
Python Pandas - Indexing with MultiIndex
Python Pandas - Advanced Reindexing with MultiIndex
Python Pandas - Renaming MultiIndex Labels
Python Pandas - Sorting a MultiIndex
Python Pandas - Binary Operations
Python Pandas - Binary Comparison Operations
Python Pandas - Boolean Indexing
Python Pandas - Boolean Masking
Python Pandas - Data Reshaping & Pivoting
Python Pandas - Pivoting
Python Pandas - Stacking & Unstacking
Python Pandas - Melting
Python Pandas - Computing Dummy Variables
Python Pandas - Categorical Data
Python Pandas - Categorical Data
Python Pandas - Ordering & Sorting Categorical Data
Python Pandas - Comparing Categorical Data
Python Pandas - Handling Missing Data
Python Pandas - Missing Data
Python Pandas - Filling Missing Data
Python Pandas - Interpolation of Missing Values
Python Pandas - Dropping Missing Data
Python Pandas - Calculations with Missing Data
Python Pandas - Handling Duplicates
Python Pandas - Duplicated Data
Python Pandas - Counting & Retrieving Unique Elements
Python Pandas - Duplicated Labels
Python Pandas - Grouping & Aggregation
Python Pandas - GroupBy
Python Pandas - Time-series Data
Python Pandas - Date Functionality
Python Pandas - Timedelta
Python Pandas - Sparse Data Structures
Python Pandas - Sparse Data
Python Pandas - Visualization
Python Pandas - Visualization
Python Pandas - Additional Concepts
Python Pandas - Caveats & Gotchas
Python Pandas - Quick Guide
Python Pandas - Cheatsheet
Python Pandas - Useful Resources
Python Pandas - Discussion
Selected Reading
UPSC IAS Exams Notes
Developer's Best Practices
Questions and Answers
Effective Resume Writing
AI Based Resume Builder
Personal AI Study Assistant
Generate Coding Logic
HR Interview Questions
Computer Glossary
Who is Who
Python Pandas Tutorial
Pandasis an open-source, BSD-licensed Python library providing high-performance, easy-to-use data structures and data analysis tools for thePython programming language. ThisPandas tutorialhas been prepared for those who want to learn about the foundations and advanced features of the Pandas Python package. Python with Pandas is used in a wide range of fields including academic and commercial domains including finance, economics, Statistics, analytics, etc. In this tutorial, we will learn the various features of Python Pandas and how to use them in practice.
What is Pandas?
Pandasis a powerful Python library that is specifically designed to work on data frames that have "relational" or "labeled" data. Its aim aligns with doing real-world data analysis using Python. Its flexibility and functionality make it indispensable for various data-related tasks. Hence, this Python package works well for data manipulation, operating a dataset, exploring a data frame, data analysis, and machine learning-related tasks. To work on it we should first install it using a pip command like "pip install pandas" and then import it like "import pandas as pd". After successfully installing and importing, we can enjoy the innovative functions of pandas to work on datasets or data frames. Pandas versatility and ease of use make it a go-to tool for working with structured data in Python.
Generally, Pandas operates a data frame usingSeriesandDataFrame; where Series works on a one-dimensional labeled array holding data of any type likeintegers,strings, andobjects, while a DataFrame is a two-dimensional data structure that manages and operates data in tabular form (using rows and columns).
Why Pandas?
The beauty of Pandas is that it simplifies the task related to data frames and makes it simple to do many of the time-consuming, repetitive tasks involved in working with data frames, such as:
Import datasets- available in the form of spreadsheets, comma-separated values (CSV) files, and more.
Data cleansing- dealing with missing values and representing them as NaN, NA, or NaT.
Size mutability- columns can be added and removed from DataFrame and higher-dimensional objects.
Data normalization– normalize the data into a suitable format for analysis.
Data alignment- objects can be explicitly aligned to a set of labels.Intuitive merging and joining data sets – we can merge and join datasets.
Reshaping and pivoting of datasets– datasets can be reshaped and pivoted as per the need.
Efficient manipulation and extraction- manipulation and extraction of specific parts of extensive datasets using intelligent label-based slicing, indexing, and subsetting techniques.
Statistical analysis- to perform statistical operations on datasets.
Data visualization- Visualize datasets and uncover insights.
Applications of Pandas
The most common applications of Pandas are as follows:
Data Cleaning: Pandas provides functionalities to clean messy data, deal with incomplete or inconsistent data, handle missing values, remove duplicates, and standardize formats to do effective data analysis.
Data Exploration: Pandas easily summarize statistics, find trends, and visualize data using built-in plotting functions, Matplotlib, or Seaborn integration.
Data Preparation: Pandas may pivot, melt, convert variables, and merge datasets based on common columns to prepare data for analysis.
Data Analysis: Pandas supports descriptive statistics, time series analysis, group-by operations, and custom functions.
Data Visualisation: Pandas itself has basic plotting capabilities; it integrates and supports data visualization libraries like Matplotlib, Seaborn, and Plotly to create innovative visualizations.
Time Series Analysis: Pandas supportsdate/timeindexing, resampling, frequency conversion, and rolling statistics for time series data.
Data Aggregation and Grouping:Pandas groupby() functionlets you aggregate data and compute group-wise summary statistics or apply functions to groups.
Data Input/Output: Pandas makes data input and export easy by reading and writing CSV, Excel, JSON, SQL databases, and more.
Machine Learning: Pandas works well with Scikit-learn for data preparation, feature engineering, and model input data.
Web Scraping: Pandas may be used with BeautifulSoup or Scrapy to parse and analyse structured web data for web scraping and data extraction.
Financial Analysis: Pandas is commonly used in finance for stock market data analysis, financial indicator calculation, and portfolio optimization.
Text Data Analysis: Pandas' string manipulation, regular expressions, and text mining functions help analyse textual data.
Experimental Data Analysis: Pandas makes manipulating and analysing large datasets, performing statistical tests, and visualizing results easy.
Audience: Who Should Learn Pandas
ThisPandas tutorialhas been prepared for those who want to learn about the foundations and advanced features of the Pandas Python package. It is most widely used in the domain of data science, engineering, research, agriculture science, management, statistics, and other related fields where computation on a data set requires or explores the data frames to find out the data insights that are required to make fruitful decisions. After completing this tutorial, you will find yourself skilled in pandas Python package from where you can take yourself to the next levels of expertise on other Python packages like Matplotlib, SciPy, scikit-learn, scikit-image, and many more to keep mastering Python language.
Pandas library uses most of the functionalities of NumPy. It is suggested to you to go through our tutorial onNumPy.
Prerequisites To Learn Pandas
You should have a basic understanding of computer programming. A basic understanding of Python and any of the programming languages is a plus. Basic knowledge of statistics and mathematics is helpful for data analysis and interpretation. Pandas provide functions for descriptive statistics, aggregation, and computation of summary metrics. By having a strong foundation of above mentioned, you'll be well-equipped to leverage the power of Pandas for data manipulation and analysis tasks.
Pandas Codebase
You can find the source for the Pandas athttps://github.com/jvns/pandas-cookbook
Frequently Asked Questions about Python Pandas
There are some very Frequently Asked Questions(FAQ) about Python Pandas, this section tries to answer them briefly.
Pandas is a Python library used for data manipulation and analysis. It is widely used in the domain of data science, engineering, research, agriculture science, management, statistics, and other related fields where you need to work with datasets.
The key features of Pandas as follows −
Fast and Efficient DataFrame Object.
Pandas supports various data loading tools for in-memory data objects.
Data alignment and handling of missing data.
Pandas allows you to reshaping and pivoting of datasets.
Label-based slicing, indexing and subsetting of large data sets.
Insert or delete columns from a data structure.
Group by data for aggregation and transformations.
High performance merging and joining.
Time Series functionality.
A Series in Pandas is a one-dimensional labeled array capable of holding data of any type (integer, string, float, Python objects, etc.).
The two primary data structures of pandas are −
Series (1-dimensional)
DataFrame (2-dimensional)
Pandas is the best tool for handling real-world messy data. It is built on top of NumPy and is open-source. Pandas allows for fast and effective data manipulation using its data structures, Series and DataFrame. It handles missing data, supports multiple file formats, and facilitates data cleaning and analysis.
Yes, Python pandas is free for commercial use. It is accessible to everyone and free for users to use and modify.
Pandas development began in 2008 at AQR Capital Management. By the end of 2009, it had been open-sourced, and it is now actively supported by a community of contributors worldwide.
The two primary data structures of pandas are:
Series− 1-dimensional labeled array.
DataFrame− 2-dimensional table of data with labeled axes.
The easiest way to install pandas is to install it as part of the Anaconda distribution, a cross-platform distribution for data analysis and scientific computing. The Conda package manager is the recommended installation method for most users. For further details, refer to ourEnvironment SetupTutorial.
Pandas provides high-level data manipulation tools built on top of NumPy. The Pandas module mainly works with tabular data, whereas the NumPy module works with numerical data.
Pandas is a Python package that provides fast, flexible, and expressive data structures designed to make working with "relational" or "labeled" data both easy and intuitive. It is a fundamental high-level building block for performing practical, real-world data analysis in Python, aiming to be the most powerful and flexible open-source data analysis/manipulation tool available in any language.
The best place to learn Python pandas is through our comprehensive and user-friendly tutorial. Our Python Pandas tutorial provides an excellent starting point for understanding data analysis programming with Python pandas. You can explore our simple and effective learning materials at your own pace.
Following are some tips to learn Python Pandas −
Decide to learn Python Pandas and stay committed to your goal.
Install the necessary tools like Anaconda or Miniconda on your computer.
Start with our Python Pandas tutorial and progress step by step from the basics.
Read more articles, watch online courses, or buy a book on Python Pandas to deepen your understanding.
Apply what youve learned by developing small projects that incorporate Python Pandas and other technologies.
You can handle missing values in a DataFrame by −
Inserting missing data
Performing calculations with missing data
Dropping missing data
Filling missing data

SciPy - Home
SciPy - Introduction
SciPy - Environment Setup
SciPy - Basic Functionality
SciPy - Relationship with NumPy
SciPy Clusters
SciPy - Clusters
SciPy - Hierarchical Clustering
SciPy - K-means Clustering
SciPy - Distance Metrics
SciPy Constants
SciPy - Constants
SciPy - Mathematical Constants
SciPy - Physical Constants
SciPy - Unit Conversion
SciPy - Astronomical Constants
SciPy - Fourier Transforms
SciPy - FFTpack
SciPy - Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT)
SciPy - Fast Fourier Transform (FFT)
SciPy Integration Equations
SciPy - Integrate Module
SciPy - Single Integration
SciPy - Double Integration
SciPy - Triple Integration
SciPy - Multiple Integration
SciPy Differential Equations
SciPy - Differential Equations
SciPy - Integration of Stochastic Differential Equations
SciPy - Integration of Ordinary Differential Equations
SciPy - Discontinuous Functions
SciPy - Oscillatory Functions
SciPy - Partial Differential Equations
SciPy Interpolation
SciPy - Interpolate
SciPy - Linear 1-D Interpolation
SciPy - Polynomial 1-D Interpolation
SciPy - Spline 1-D Interpolation
SciPy - Grid Data Multi-Dimensional Interpolation
SciPy - RBF Multi-Dimensional Interpolation
SciPy - Polynomial & Spline Interpolation
SciPy Curve Fitting
SciPy - Curve Fitting
SciPy - Linear Curve Fitting
SciPy - Non-Linear Curve Fitting
SciPy - Input & Output
SciPy - Input & Output
SciPy - Reading & Writing Files
SciPy - Working with Different File Formats
SciPy - Efficient Data Storage with HDF5
SciPy - Data Serialization
SciPy Linear Algebra
SciPy - Linalg
SciPy - Matrix Creation & Basic Operations
SciPy - Matrix LU Decomposition
SciPy - Matrix QU Decomposition
SciPy - Singular Value Decomposition
SciPy - Cholesky Decomposition
SciPy - Solving Linear Systems
SciPy - Eigenvalues & Eigenvectors
SciPy Image Processing
SciPy - Ndimage
SciPy - Reading & Writing Images
SciPy - Image Transformation
SciPy - Filtering & Edge Detection
SciPy - Top Hat Filters
SciPy - Morphological Filters
SciPy - Low Pass Filters
SciPy - High Pass Filters
SciPy - Bilateral Filter
SciPy - Median Filter
SciPy - Non - Linear Filters in Image Processing
SciPy - High Boost Filter
SciPy - Laplacian Filter
SciPy - Morphological Operations
SciPy - Image Segmentation
SciPy - Thresholding in Image Segmentation
SciPy - Region-Based Segmentation
SciPy - Connected Component Labeling
SciPy Optimize
SciPy - Optimize
SciPy - Special Matrices &  Functions
SciPy - Unconstrained Optimization
SciPy - Constrained Optimization
SciPy - Matrix Norms
SciPy - Sparse Matrix
SciPy - Frobenius Norm
SciPy - Spectral Norm
SciPy Condition Numbers
SciPy - Condition Numbers
SciPy - Linear Least Squares
SciPy - Non-Linear Least Squares
SciPy - Finding Roots of Scalar Functions
SciPy - Finding Roots of Multivariate Functions
SciPy - Signal Processing
SciPy - Signal Filtering & Smoothing
SciPy - Short-Time Fourier Transform
SciPy - Wavelet Transform
SciPy - Continuous Wavelet Transform
SciPy - Discrete Wavelet Transform
SciPy - Wavelet Packet Transform
SciPy - Multi-Resolution Analysis
SciPy - Stationary Wavelet Transform
SciPy - Statistical Functions
SciPy - Stats
SciPy - Descriptive Statistics
SciPy - Continuous Probability Distributions
SciPy - Discrete Probability Distributions
SciPy - Statistical Tests & Inference
SciPy - Generating Random Samples
SciPy - Kaplan-Meier Estimator Survival Analysis
SciPy - Cox Proportional Hazards Model Survival Analysis
SciPy Spatial Data
SciPy - Spatial
SciPy - Special Functions
SciPy - Special Package
SciPy Advanced Topics
SciPy - CSGraph
SciPy - ODR
SciPy Useful Resources
SciPy - Reference
SciPy - Quick Guide
SciPy - Cheatsheet
SciPy - Useful Resources
SciPy - Discussion
Selected Reading
UPSC IAS Exams Notes
Developer's Best Practices
Questions and Answers
Effective Resume Writing
AI Based Resume Builder
Personal AI Study Assistant
Generate Coding Logic
HR Interview Questions
Computer Glossary
Who is Who
SciPy - Tutorial
SciPy Tutorial
SciPyis a scientific library for Python is an open source, BSD-licensed library for mathematics, science and engineering. The SciPy library depends on NumPy, which provides convenient and fast N-dimensional array manipulation. The main reason for building the SciPy library is that, it should work with NumPy arrays. It provides many user-friendly and efficient numerical practices such as routines for numerical integration and optimization. This is an introductory tutorial, which covers the fundamentals of SciPy and describes how to deal with its various modules.
Audience
The SciPy Tutorial is intended for individuals looking to leverage the power of SciPy for scientific and technical computing. It aims to help readers understand and implement SciPy's core functionalities for solving complex mathematical and engineering problems.
Prerequisites
Before exploringSciPythe readers should have a basic understanding of Python programming. Familiarity with NumPy and mathematical concepts such as linear algebra and calculus will be beneficial. Ensuring that Python and SciPy are installed on our system will help in executing the examples provided.

Big Data Analytics - Home
Big Data Analytics - Overview
Big Data Analytics - Characteristics
Big Data Analytics - Data Life Cycle
Big Data Analytics - Architecture
Big Data Analytics - Methodology
Big Data Analytics - Core Deliverables
Big Data Adoption & Planning Considerations
Big Data Analytics - Key Stakeholders
Big Data Analytics - Data Analyst
Big Data Analytics - Data Scientist
Data Analytics - Problem Definition
Big Data Analytics - Data Collection
Big Data Analytics - Cleansing data
Big Data Analytics - Summarizing
Big Data Analytics - Data Exploration
Big Data Analytics - Data Visualization
Big Data Analytics Methods
Big Data Analytics - Introduction to R
Data Analytics - Introduction to SQL
Big Data Analytics - Charts & Graphs
Big Data Analytics - Data Tools
Data Analytics - Statistical Methods
Advanced Methods
Machine Learning for Data Analysis
Naive Bayes Classifier
K-Means Clustering
Association Rules
Big Data Analytics - Decision Trees
Logistic Regression
Big Data Analytics - Time Series
Big Data Analytics - Text Analytics
Big Data Analytics - Online Learning
Big Data Analytics Useful Resources
Big Data Analytics - Quick Guide
Big Data Analytics - Resources
Big Data Analytics - Discussion
Selected Reading
UPSC IAS Exams Notes
Developer's Best Practices
Questions and Answers
Effective Resume Writing
AI Based Resume Builder
Personal AI Study Assistant
Generate Coding Logic
HR Interview Questions
Computer Glossary
Who is Who
Big Data Analytics Tutorial
Big Data; as its name implies, the data which is bigger is known as big data. The data size is increasing day by day. An individual deals with data using mobile phones, tabs, and laptops while an organisation deals with business data; statistically it has been noted that the data size has drastically increased in the past decade.
What is Big Data?
The term "Big Data" usually refers to datasets that are too large, complex and unable to be processed by ordinary data processing systems to manage efficiently. These datasets can be derived from a variety of sources, including social media, sensors, internet activity, and mobile devices. The data can be structured, semi-structured and unstructured type of data.
Big Data Analytics
A process of analysing large and diverse data sets is known as "Big Data," It discovers hidden patterns, unknown relationships, market trends, user preferences, and other important information. It uses advanced analytics techniques such as statistical analysis, machine learning, data mining, and predictive modelling to extract insights from enormous datasets.
Organisations across the world capture terabytes of data about their users' interactions, business, social media, and also sensors from devices such as mobile phones and automobiles. The challenge of this era is to make sense of this sea of data. This is where big data analytics comes into the picture.
Where Big Data Analytics Used?
Big Data Analytics strives to assist organisations in making more informed business decisions, increasing operational efficiency, improving customer experiences and services, and making sure to sustain industries in a competitive world with their respective industries. The Big Data Analytics process involves data gathering, storage, processing, analysis, and visualisation of outcomes to make strategic business decisions. The process of converting large amounts of unstructured raw data, retrieved from different sources to a data product useful for organizations forms the core of Big Data Analytics.
Overall, Big Data Analytics enables organizations to harness the vast amounts of data available to them and turn it into actionable insights that drive business growth and innovation.
In this big data analytics tutorial, we will discuss the most fundamental concepts and methods of Big Data Analytics.
Audience
This tutorial has been prepared for software professionals aspiring to learn the basics of Big Data Analytics. Professionals who are into analytics, in general, may as well use this tutorial to good effect.
Prerequisites
Before you start proceeding with this tutorial, we assume that you have prior exposure to handling huge volumes of unprocessed data at an organizational level.
Through this tutorial, we will develop a mini project to provide exposure to a real-world problem and how to solve it using Big Data Analytics.

Machine Learning Tutorials
Explore the top free machine learning tutorials
Learn Amazon CodeWhisperert
Learn Apache MXNet
Learn Artificial Intelligence with Python
Learn Caffe2
Learn ChatGPT
Learn Claude AI
Learn DALL-E
Learn Deep Learning with Keras
Learn Generative AI
Learn Google Assistant
Learn H2O
Python Deep Learning
Learn Keras
Learn Knime
Logistic Regression in Python
Learn Machine Learning
Learn Mahotas
Prompt Engineering
Learn PyBrain
Learn PyTorch
Learn Scikit
Learn Scikit Image
Learn TensorFlow
Learn Theano
Learn Time Series
Learn Machine Learning with Python
Learn Microsoft Cognitive Toolkit(CNTK)
Learn Python Data Science

Python - Home
Python - Overview
Python - History
Python - Features
Python vs C++
Python - Hello World Program
Python - Application Areas
Python - Interpreter
Python - Environment Setup
Python - Virtual Environment
Python - Basic Syntax
Python - Variables
Python - Data Types
Python - Type Casting
Python - Unicode System
Python - Literals
Python - Operators
Python - Arithmetic Operators
Python - Comparison Operators
Python - Assignment Operators
Python - Logical Operators
Python - Bitwise Operators
Python - Membership Operators
Python - Identity Operators
Python - Operator Precedence
Python - Comments
Python - User Input
Python - Numbers
Python - Booleans
Python - Control Flow
Python - Decision Making
Python - If Statement
Python - If else
Python - Nested If
Python - Match-Case Statement
Python - Loops
Python - for Loops
Python - for-else Loops
Python - While Loops
Python - break Statement
Python - continue Statement
Python - pass Statement
Python - Nested Loops
Python Functions & Modules
Python - Functions
Python - Default Arguments
Python - Keyword Arguments
Python - Keyword-Only Arguments
Python - Positional Arguments
Python - Positional-Only Arguments
Python - Arbitrary Arguments
Python - Variables Scope
Python - Function Annotations
Python - Modules
Python - Built in Functions
Python Strings
Python - Strings
Python - Slicing Strings
Python - Modify Strings
Python - String Concatenation
Python - String Formatting
Python - Escape Characters
Python - String Methods
Python - String Exercises
Python Lists
Python - Lists
Python - Access List Items
Python - Change List Items
Python - Add List Items
Python - Remove List Items
Python - Loop Lists
Python - List Comprehension
Python - Sort Lists
Python - Copy Lists
Python - Join Lists
Python - List Methods
Python - List Exercises
Python Tuples
Python - Tuples
Python - Access Tuple Items
Python - Update Tuples
Python - Unpack Tuples
Python - Loop Tuples
Python - Join Tuples
Python - Tuple Methods
Python - Tuple Exercises
Python Sets
Python - Sets
Python - Access Set Items
Python - Add Set Items
Python - Remove Set Items
Python - Loop Sets
Python - Join Sets
Python - Copy Sets
Python - Set Operators
Python - Set Methods
Python - Set Exercises
Python Dictionaries
Python - Dictionaries
Python - Access Dictionary Items
Python - Change Dictionary Items
Python - Add Dictionary Items
Python - Remove Dictionary Items
Python - Dictionary View Objects
Python - Loop Dictionaries
Python - Copy Dictionaries
Python - Nested Dictionaries
Python - Dictionary Methods
Python - Dictionary Exercises
Python Arrays
Python - Arrays
Python - Access Array Items
Python - Add Array Items
Python - Remove Array Items
Python - Loop Arrays
Python - Copy Arrays
Python - Reverse Arrays
Python - Sort Arrays
Python - Join Arrays
Python - Array Methods
Python - Array Exercises
Python File Handling
Python - File Handling
Python - Write to File
Python - Read Files
Python - Renaming and Deleting Files
Python - Directories
Python - File Methods
Python - OS File/Directory Methods
Python - OS Path Methods
Object Oriented Programming
Python - OOPs Concepts
Python - Classes & Objects
Python - Class Attributes
Python - Class Methods
Python - Static Methods
Python - Constructors
Python - Access Modifiers
Python - Inheritance
Python - Polymorphism
Python - Method Overriding
Python - Method Overloading
Python - Dynamic Binding
Python - Dynamic Typing
Python - Abstraction
Python - Encapsulation
Python - Interfaces
Python - Packages
Python - Inner Classes
Python - Anonymous Class and Objects
Python - Singleton Class
Python - Wrapper Classes
Python - Enums
Python - Reflection
Python Errors & Exceptions
Python - Syntax Errors
Python - Exceptions
Python - try-except Block
Python - try-finally Block
Python - Raising Exceptions
Python - Exception Chaining
Python - Nested try Block
Python - User-defined Exception
Python - Logging
Python - Assertions
Python - Built-in Exceptions
Python Multithreading
Python - Multithreading
Python - Thread Life Cycle
Python - Creating a Thread
Python - Starting a Thread
Python - Joining Threads
Python - Naming Thread
Python - Thread Scheduling
Python - Thread Pools
Python - Main Thread
Python - Thread Priority
Python - Daemon Threads
Python - Synchronizing Threads
Python Synchronization
Python - Inter-thread Communication
Python - Thread Deadlock
Python - Interrupting a Thread
Python Networking
Python - Networking
Python - Socket Programming
Python - URL Processing
Python - Generics
Python Libraries
NumPy Tutorial
Pandas Tutorial
SciPy Tutorial
Matplotlib Tutorial
Django Tutorial
OpenCV Tutorial
Python Miscellenous
Python - Date & Time
Python - Maths
Python - Iterators
Python - Generators
Python - Closures
Python - Decorators
Python - Recursion
Python - Reg Expressions
Python - PIP
Python - Database Access
Python - Weak References
Python - Serialization
Python - Templating
Python - Output Formatting
Python - Performance Measurement
Python - Data Compression
Python - CGI Programming
Python - XML Processing
Python - GUI Programming
Python - Command-Line Arguments
Python - Docstrings
Python - JSON
Python - Sending Email
Python - Further Extensions
Python - Tools/Utilities
Python - GUIs
Python Advanced Concepts
Python - Abstract Base Classes
Python - Custom Exceptions
Python - Higher Order Functions
Python - Object Internals
Python - Memory Management
Python - Metaclasses
Python - Metaprogramming with Metaclasses
Python - Mocking and Stubbing
Python - Monkey Patching
Python - Signal Handling
Python - Type Hints
Python - Automation Tutorial
Python - Humanize Package
Python - Context Managers
Python - Coroutines
Python - Descriptors
Python - Diagnosing and Fixing Memory Leaks
Python - Immutable Data Structures
Python Useful Resources
Python - Questions & Answers
Python - Interview Questions & Answers
Python - Online Quiz
Python - Quick Guide
Python - Reference
Python - Cheatsheet
Python - Projects
Python - Useful Resources
Python - Discussion
Python Compiler
NumPy Compiler
Matplotlib Compiler
SciPy Compiler
Selected Reading
UPSC IAS Exams Notes
Developer's Best Practices
Questions and Answers
Effective Resume Writing
AI Based Resume Builder
Personal AI Study Assistant
Generate Coding Logic
HR Interview Questions
Computer Glossary
Who is Who
Python Tutorial
Python Introduction
What is Python
Python "Hello, World!"
Python Compiler
Python Characteristics
Applications of Python
Features of Python
Python Database Handling
Python Reference
Python Practice
Python Exercises
Python Jobs
Why to Learn Python
Careers with Python
Download Python
Python UpdatesPython AudiencesPython PrerequisitesPython Questions & Answers
Python Audiences
Python Prerequisites
Python Questions & Answers
Python Tutorial
Today, Python is one of the most popular programming languages. Although it is a general-purpose language, it is used in various areas of applications such as Machine Learning, Artificial Intelligence, web development, IoT, and more.
This Python tutorial has been written for the beginners to help them understand the basic to advanced concepts of Python Programming Language. After completing this tutorial, you will find yourself at a great level of expertise in Python, from where you can take yourself to the next levels to become a world class Software Engineer.
What is Python?
Pythonis a very popular general-purpose interpreted, interactive, object-oriented, and high-level programming language. Python is dynamically-typed and garbage-collected programming language. It was created by Guido van Rossum during 1985- 1990. Like Perl, Python source code is also available under the GNU General Public License (GPL).
This Python tutorial gives a complete understanding of Python programming language, starting from basic concepts to advanced concepts. This tutorial will take you through simple and practical approaches while learning Python Programming language.
Python "Hello, World!"
To start with Python programming, the very basic program is toprint "Hello, World!"You can use theprint() function. Below is an example of Python code to print "Hello, World!" −
# Python code to print "Hello, World!"
print ("Hello, World!")
Python Online Compiler
Our Python programming tutorial provides various examples to explain different concepts. We have providedOnline Python Compiler/Interpreter. You can Edit and Execute almost all the examples directly from your browser without the need to set up your development environment.
Try to click the iconto run the following Python code to print conventional "Hello, World!".
# This is my first Python program.
# This will print 'Hello, World!' as the output

print ("Hello, World!");
Characteristics of Python
Following are important characteristics ofPython Programming−
It supports functional and structured programming methods as well asOOP.
It can be used as a scripting language or can be compiled to byte-code for building large applications.
It provides very high-level dynamic data types and supports dynamic type checking.
It supports automatic garbage collection.
It can be easily integrated with C, C++, COM, ActiveX, CORBA, and Java.
Applications of Python
Python is a general purpose programming language known for its readability. It is widely applied in various fields.
InData Science, Python libraries likeNumpy,Pandas, andMatplotlibare used for data analysis and visualization.
Python frameworks likeDjango, andPyramid,  make the development and deployment of Web Applications easy.
This programming language also extends its applications tocomputer visionand image processing.
It is also favored in many tasks likeAutomation, Job Scheduling,GUI development, etc.
Features of Python
The latest release of Python is 3.x. As mentioned before, Python is one of the most widely used languages on the web. I'm going to list a few of them here:
Easy-to-learn− Python has few keywords, simple structure, and a clearly defined syntax. This allows the student to pick up the language quickly.
Easy-to-read− Python code is more clearly defined and visible to the eyes.
Easy-to-maintain− Python's source code is fairly easy-to-maintain.
A broad standard library− Python's bulk of the library is very portable and cross-platform compatible on UNIX, Windows, and Macintosh.
Interactive Mode− Python has support for an interactive mode that allows interactive testing and debugging of snippets of code.
Portable− Python can run on a wide variety of hardware platforms and has the same interface on all platforms.
Extendable− You can add low-level modules to thePython interpreter. These modules enable programmers to add to or customize their tools to be more efficient.
Databases− Python provides interfaces to all major commercial databases.
GUI Programming− Python supports GUI applications that can be created and ported to many system calls, libraries, and Windows systems, such as Windows MFC, Macintosh, and the X Window system of Unix.
Scalable− Python provides a better structure and support for large programs than shell scripting.
Python Database Handling
The following tutorials will help you learn how to work with different databases using Python programming:
Python MongoDB Tutorial
Python MySQL Tutorial
Python PostgreSQL Tutorial
Python SQLite Tutorial
Python Reference
The complete function and method references −
Python Complete Reference
Python Built-in Functions Reference
Python Modules Reference
Python Keywords Reference
Python Cheatsheet
Python Practice
Practice Python from the below-given links:
Python Quick Guide
Python Online Quiz
Python Interview Questions & Answers
Python Exercises
You can practice various Python topics with the help of examples provided:
String Exercises
List Exercises
Tuple Exercises
Set Exercises
Dictionary Exercises
Array Exercises
Python Jobs
Today, Python is very high in demand, and all the major companies are looking for great Python programmers to develop websites, software components, and applications or to work with data science, AI, and ML technologies. When we are developing this tutorial in 2022, there is a high shortage of Python programmers, where the market demands a greater number of Python programmers due to its applications in machine learning, artificial intelligence, etc.
Today, a Python programmer with 3-5 years of experience is asking for around $150,000 in an in an annual package, and this is the most demanding programming language in America. Though it can vary depending on the location of the job. It's impossible to list all of the companies using Python, to name a few big companies are:
Google
Intel
NASA
PayPal
Facebook
IBM
Amazon
Netflix
Pinterest
Uber
Many more...
So, you could be the next potential employee for any of these major companies. We have developed great learning material for you to learn Python programming, which will help you prepare for the technical interviews and certification exams based on Python. So, start learning Python using this simple and effective tutorial from anywhere and anytime, absolutely at your pace.
Why to Learn Python?
Python is consistently rated as one of the world's most popular programming languages. Python is fairly easy to learn, so if you are starting to learn any programming language, then Python could be your great choice. Today, various schools, colleges, and universities are teaching Python as their primary programming language. There are many other good reasons that make Python the top choice of any programmer:
Python is open source, which means it's available free of cost.
Python is simple and so easy to learn.
Python is versatile and can be used to create many different things.
Python has powerful development libraries, including AI, ML, etc.
Python is much in demand and ensures a high salary.
Pythonis a MUST for students and working professionals to become great software engineers, especially when they are working in the web development domain. I will list down some of the key advantages of learning Python:
Python is Interpreted− Python is processed at runtime by the interpreter. You do not need to compile your program before executing it. This is similar to PERL and PHP.
Python is Interactive− You can actually sit at a Python prompt and interact with the interpreter directly to write your programs.
Python is Object-Oriented− Python supports Object-Oriented style or technique of programming that encapsulates code within objects.
Python is a Beginner's Language− Python is a great language for the beginner-level programmers and supports the development of a wide range of applications from simple text processing to WWW browsers to games.
Careers with Python
If you know Python nicely, then you have a great career ahead. Here are just a few of the career options where Python is a key skill:
Game developer
Web designer
Python developer
Full-stack developer
Machine learning engineer
Data scientist
Data analyst
Data engineer
DevOps engineer
Software engineer
Many more other roles
Download Python
You can download Python from its official website:https://www.python.org/downloads/
Python Updates & New Features
The current stable version of Python is 3.13, which was released on October 7, 2024. Python 3.14 is still in the development phase with many new features and changes:
PEP 649: Deferred evaluation of annotations.
PEP 741: Python configuration C API.
PEP 761: Sigstore replaces PGP signatures for verification.
Improved error messages.
Target Audience: Who Can Learn Python?
This tutorial has been prepared for the beginners to help them understand the basics to advanced concepts of Python programming language. After completing this tutorial, you will find yourself at a great level of expertise in Python programming, from where you can take yourself to the next levels.
Prerequisites to Learn Python
Although it is a beginners tutorial, we assume that the readers have a reasonable exposure to any programming environment and knowledge of basic concepts such as variables, commands, syntax, etc.
Python  Questions & Answers
You can explore a set of Python Questions and Answers atPython Questions & Answers

Java - Home
Java - Overview
Java - History
Java - Features
Java Vs. C++
JVM - Java Virtual Machine
Java - JDK vs JRE vs JVM
Java - Environment Setup
Java - Hello World Program
Java - Comments
Java - Basic Syntax
Java - Variables
Java - Data Types
Java - Type Casting
Java - Unicode System
Java - User Input
Java - Date & Time
Java Operators
Java - Operators
Java - Arithmetic Operators
Java - Assignment Operators
Java - Relational Operators
Java - Logical Operators
Java - Bitwise Operators
Java Operator Precedence & Associativity
Java Control Statements
Java - Decision Making
Java - If Else Statement
Java - Switch Statement
Java - Loop Control
Java - For Loop
Java - For-Each Loop
Java - While Loop
Java - Do While Loop
Java - Break Statement
Java - Continue Statement
Object Oriented Programming
Java - OOPs Concepts
Java - Object & Classes
Java - Class Attributes
Java - Class Methods
Java - Methods
Java - Variables Scope
Java - Constructors
Java - Access Modifiers
Java - Inheritance
Java - Aggregation
Java - Polymorphism
Java - Overriding
Java - Method Overloading
Java - Dynamic Binding
Java - Static Binding
Java - Instance Initializer Block
Java - Abstraction
Java - Encapsulation
Java - Interfaces
Java - Packages
Java - Inner Classes
Java - Static Class
Java - Anonymous Class
Java - Singleton Class
Java - Wrapper Classes
Java - Enums
Java - Enum Constructor
Java - Enum Strings
Java Built-in Classes
Java - Number
Java - Boolean
Java - Characters
Java - Arrays
Java - Math Class
Java File Handling
Java - Files
Java - Create a File
Java - Write to File
Java - Read Files
Java - Delete Files
Java - Directories
Java - I/O Streams
Java Error & Exceptions
Java - Exceptions
Java - try-catch Block
Java - try-with-resources
Java - Multi-catch Block
Java - Nested try Block
Java - Finally Block
Java - throw Exception
Java - Exception Propagation
Java - Built-in Exceptions
Java - Custom Exception
Java Multithreading
Java - Multithreading
Java - Thread Life Cycle
Java - Creating a Thread
Java - Starting a Thread
Java - Joining Threads
Java - Naming Thread
Java - Thread Scheduler
Java - Thread Pools
Java - Main Thread
Java - Thread Priority
Java - Daemon Threads
Java - Thread Group
Java - Shutdown Hook
Java Synchronization
Java - Synchronization
Java - Block Synchronization
Java - Static Synchronization
Java - Inter-thread Communication
Java - Thread Deadlock
Java - Interrupting a Thread
Java - Thread Control
Java - Reentrant Monitor
Java Networking
Java - Networking
Java - Socket Programming
Java - URL Processing
Java - URL Class
Java - URLConnection Class
Java - HttpURLConnection Class
Java - Socket Class
Java - Generics
Java Collections
Java - Collections
Java - Collection Interface
Java Interfaces
Java - List Interface
Java - Queue Interface
Java - Map Interface
Java - SortedMap Interface
Java - Set Interface
Java - SortedSet Interface
Java  Data Structures
Java - Data Structures
Java - Enumeration
Java Collections Algorithms
Java - Iterators
Java - Comparators
Java - Comparable Interface in Java
Advanced Java
Java - Command-Line Arguments
Java - Lambda Expressions
Java - Sending Email
Java - Applet Basics
Java - Javadoc Comments
Java - Autoboxing and Unboxing
Java - File Mismatch Method
Java - REPL (JShell)
Java - Multi-Release Jar Files
Java - Private Interface Methods
Java - Inner Class Diamond Operator
Java - Multiresolution Image API
Java - Collection Factory Methods
Java - Module System
Java - Nashorn JavaScript
Java - Optional Class
Java - Method References
Java - Functional Interfaces
Java - Default Methods
Java - Base64 Encode Decode
Java - Switch Expressions
Java - Teeing Collectors
Java - Microbenchmark
Java - Text Blocks
Java - Dynamic CDS archive
Java - Z Garbage Collector (ZGC)
Java - Null Pointer Exception
Java - Packaging Tools
Java - Sealed Classes
Java - Record Classes
Java - Hidden Classes
Java - Pattern Matching
Java - Compact Number Formatting
Java - Garbage Collection
Java - JIT Compiler
Java Miscellaneous
Java - Recursion
Java - Regular Expressions
Java - Serialization
Java - Strings
Java - Process API Improvements
Java - Stream API Improvements
Java - Enhanced @Deprecated Annotation
Java - CompletableFuture API Improvements
Java - Streams
Java - Datetime Api
Java 8 - New Features
Java 9 - New Features
Java 10 - New Features
Java 11 - New Features
Java 12 - New Features
Java 13 - New Features
Java 14 - New Features
Java 15 - New Features
Java 16 - New Features
Java APIs & Frameworks
JDBC Tutorial
SWING Tutorial
AWT Tutorial
Servlets Tutorial
JSP Tutorial
Java Class References
Java - Scanner
Java - Arrays
Java - Strings
Java - Date
Java - ArrayList
Java - Vector
Java - Stack
Java - PriorityQueue
Java - LinkedList
Java -  ArrayDeque
Java - HashMap
Java - LinkedHashMap
Java - WeakHashMap
Java - EnumMap
Java - TreeMap
Java - IdentityHashMap
Java - HashSet
Java - EnumSet
Java - LinkedHashSet
Java - TreeSet
Java - BitSet
Java - Dictionary
Java - Hashtable
Java - Properties
Java - Collection
Java - Array
Java Useful Resources
Java - Cheatsheet
Java - Questions and Answers
Java 8 - Questions and Answers
Java - Quick Guide
Java - Useful Resources
Java - Discussion
Java - Online Compiler
Java - Examples
Selected Reading
UPSC IAS Exams Notes
Developer's Best Practices
Questions and Answers
Effective Resume Writing
AI Based Resume Builder
Personal AI Study Assistant
Generate Coding Logic
HR Interview Questions
Computer Glossary
Who is Who
Java Tutorial
ThisJava tutorialhas been written for beginners to advanced programmers who are striving to learn Java programming. We have provided numerous practical examples to explain the concepts in simple and easy steps. This tutorial has been prepared and reviewed by experienced Java programmers at Tutorials Point, and the best effort has been put into making it useful for the students and Java developers.
After completing this tutorial, you will find yourself at a moderate level of expertise in Java programming, from where you can elevate yourself to the next levels.
What is Java?
Java is a popular high-level,object-oriented programminglanguage that was originally developed by Sun Microsystems and released in 1995. Currently, Java is owned by Oracle, and more than 3 billion devices run Java. Java runs on a variety of platforms, such asWindows, Mac OS, and the various versions ofUNIX. Today Java is being used to develop numerous types of software applications, including desktop apps, mobile apps, web apps, games, and much more.
In this tutorial, you will learn everything about Java, starting from basics to advanced concepts such as overview, history, installations, basic input/output, conditional & control statements, arrays, classes, inheritances, method overloading & overriding, exception handling, and many more.
Java First Example
The first example in Java is toprint "Hello, World!"on the screen. Let's have a quick look at the first examples in Java programming:
public class MyFirstJavaProgram {

   /* This is my first java program.
    * This will print 'Hello, World!' as the output
    */

   public static void main(String []args) {
      System.out.println("Hello, World!"); // prints Hello, World!
   }
}
Getting Started with Java
Explore the following chapters to get started learning Java programming:
Java - Home
Java - Overview
Java - History
Java - Features
Java Vs. C++
JVM - Java Virtual Machine
Java - JDK vs JRE vs JVM
Java - Hello World Program
Java - Environment Setup
Java - Basic Syntax
Java Basics
Explore the basic topics such as data types, operators, user input, etc.:
Java - Variable Types
Java - Data Types
Java - Type Casting
Java - Unicode System
Java - Basic Operators
Java - Comments
Java - User Input
Java - Date & Time
Java Conditional Statements
Furthermore, in Java, explore the conditional statements to implement the logic and to make decisions based on the conditions:
Java - Decision Making
Java - If-else
Java - Switch
Java Loops and Control Statements
Explore the loops and control statements to learn how to control the execution of the programming logics:
Java - Loop Control
Java - For Loops
Java - For-Each Loops
Java - While Loops
Java - do-while Loops
Java - Break
Java - Continue
Java String and Arrays
Explore the following strings and array-related chapters:
Java Strings and String Class
Java - Strings
Java OOPs
Explore the following chapters to learn the object-oriented programming approach in Java:
Java - OOPs Concepts
Java - Object & Classes
Java - Class Attributes
Java - Class Methods
Java - Methods
Java - Variables Scope
Java - Constructors
Java - Access Modifiers
Java - Inheritance
Java - Aggregation
Java - Polymorphism
Java - Overriding
Java - Method Overloading
Java - Dynamic Binding
Java - Static Binding
Java - Instance Initializer Block
Java - Abstraction
Java - Encapsulation
Java Collections and Interfaces
Explore Java interfaces and collections-related chapters:
Java - Interfaces
Java - List Interface
Java - Queue Interface
Java - Map Interface
Java - SortedMap Interface
Java - Set Interface
Java - SortedSet Interface
Java - Iterators
Java - Comparators
Java - Comparable Interface in Java
Java - Collections
Java - Collection Interface
Java Exceptional Handling
Explore the file handling chapters to learn how to create, write, read, and manipulate the files and directories:
Java - Files
Java - Create a File
Java - Write to File
Java - Read Files
Java - Delete Files
Java - Directories
Java - I/O Streams
Java Multithreading
Explore the threading-related chapters to learn to manage multiple threads in Java:
Java - Multithreading
Java - Thread Life Cycle
Java - Creating a Thread
Java - Starting a Thread
Java - Joining Threads
Java - Naming Thread
Java - Thread Scheduler
Java - Thread Pools
Java - Main Thread
Java - Thread Priority
Java - Daemon Threads
Java - Thread Group
Java - Shutdown Hook
Java Practices
Java Quick Guide
Java Interview Questions
Java 8 Interview Questions
Java Online Test
Java Mock Test
Java References
Here, you can find the package, class, and method references −
Java Scanner Class
Java Arrays Class
Java Strings Class
Java Date Class
Java ArrayList Class
Java Vector Class
Java Stack Class
Java PriorityQueue Class
Java LinkedList Class
Java  ArrayDeque Class
Java HashMap Class
Java LinkedHashMap Class
Java WeakHashMap Class
Java EnumMap Class
Java TreeMap Class
Java IdentityHashMap Class
Java HashSet Class
Java EnumSet Class
Java LinkedHashSet Class
Java TreeSet Class
Java BitSet Class
Java Dictionary Class
Java Hashtable Class
Java Properties Class
Java Collection Class
Java Array Class
Online Java Compiler
Our Java programming tutorial provides various examples to explain the concepts. To compile and execute the given Java programming examples in your browser itself, we have providedOnline Java Compiler. You can edit and run almost all the examples directly from your browser without the need to set up your development environment.
Try to click the iconto run the following Java code to print conventional "Hello, World!" using Java Programming.
Below code box allows you to change the value of the code. So, please try to change the value insideprintln()and run it again to verify the result.
public class MyFirstJavaProgram {

   /* This is my first java program.
    * This will print 'Hello, World!' as the output
    */

   public static void main(String []args) {
      System.out.println("Hello, World!"); // prints Hello, World!
   }
}
Java Features
Java is a feature-rich language. Java is evolving continuously with every update, and updates are coming every six months. Following are some of the main features of the Java language:
Object Oriented: Java is a pure object-oriented language, and everything in Java is an object. Java supports OOPS principles likeInheritance,Encapsulation,Polymorphism, Classes	, and so on. Java itself can be extended as well, being based on an object model.
Platform Independent: Java code is platform independent. A Java code is not compiled into machine-specific code; it is compiled into a platform-neutral byte code. This byte code is executed byJVMwhich runs the code on the underlying platform. This capability makes Java a Write Once Run Anywhere language.
Easy To Learn: Java inherits features from C and C++, and developers can easily learn Java if they know any of the C or C++ languages. Even for someone new to computer languages, Java is very easy to learn from scratch.
Secure: Java is secure by architecture. A developer is not required to directly interact with the underlying memory or operating system. Java provides automatic garbage collection, so developers are not required to worry about memory leaks, management, etc.
Architectural-Neutral: Java byte code can be executed on any kind of processor. JRE automatically handles the code execution on different types of processors.
Portable: A Java code written on a Windows machine can be executed without any code change on MacOS and vice versa. There is no need to make any operating system-specific code changes.
Robust: Java is a very robust language with very strong compile-time error checks, strict type checking, and runtime exception handling.
Multithreading: Java provides inbuilt support for multiprocessing and multithreading. Java provides thread handling, monitors, deadlock handling, racing conditions, etc.
High Performance: Java, although being interpreted, is still very performant. TheJIT(Just In Time) compilerhelps in improving performance.
Distributed: Java is designed for distributed systems and is the most popular language for developing internet-based applications as the internet is a distributed environment.
Java Applications
Since Java supports object-oriented features and is platform-independent, it is extensively used in various fields. Listed below are a few areas where Java is used -
Enterprise solutions
Game development
Secured web development
Embedded systems
Mobile application development
Big Data Applications, and many more.
Java Platforms (Editions)
Platforms of Java are divided into four Java editions, which are −
Java SE (Java Standard Edition): It is a standard edition that is used to develop and deploy portable code for desktop and server environments.
Java EE (Java Enterprise Edition): It is an enterprise edition that is used to develop web applications.
Java ME (Java Micro Edition): J2ME is used to develop mobile applications; it is a micro edition of Java.
JavaFx:It is used to develop lightweight user interfaces for rich internet applications.
Java Jobs & Opportunities
Java is very in demand, and all the major companies are recruiting Java programmers to develop their desktop, web, and mobile applications.
Today, a Java programmer with 3-5 years of experience is asking for around $120,000 in an in an annual package, and this is the most demanding programming language in America. Though it can vary depending on the location of the job. Following are the great companies that are using Java and they need good Java programmers:
Google
Microsoft
Facebook
IBM
Amazon
Netflix
Pinterest
Uber
JetBrains
Many more...
So, you could be the next potential employee for any of these major companies. We have developed great learning material for Java that will help you prepare for the technical interviews and certification exams based on Java. So, start learning Java using this simple and effective tutorial from anywhere and anytime, absolutely at your pace.
Why to Learn Java?
Java is a MUST to learn programming language for students and working professionals to become a great software engineer, especially when they are working in the software development domain. If you will conduct a survey about the best programming language around, Java is sure to come up.
Java is a fairly easy programming language to learn, so if you are starting to learn any programming language, then Java could be your great choice. There's also plenty of Java tools that make it easy for developers and beginners to use. There are many other good reasons that make Java the first choice of any programmer:
Java is open source, which means it's available free of cost.
Java is simple and so easy to learn.
Java is much in demand and ensures a high salary.
Java has a large, vibrant community.
Java has powerful development tools.
Java is platform-independent.
Who should Learn Java
ThisJava tutorialwill help both students as well as working professionals who want to develop applications using Java technologies like banking systems, support systems, information systems, websites, mobile apps, personal blogs, etc. We recommend reading this tutorial in the sequence listed in the left-side menu.
Today, Java is one of the most demanding programming languages, and so it has become an essential language to learn for anyone involved in the software application development process, including software developers, software designers, project managers, etc.
Prerequisites to Learn Java
Though we have tried our best to present the Core Java concepts in a simple and easy way, still, before you start learning Java, it is assumed that the readers have a reasonable exposure to any programming environment and knowledge of basic concepts such as variables, commands, syntax, etc.
Learn Java by Examples
This tutorial provides a set of Java examples. Practice these examples to learn the Java concepts better:Java Examples
Java Online Quizzes
This Java tutorial helps you prepare for technical interviews and certification exams. We have provided various quizzes and assignments to check your learning level. Given quizzes have multiple-choice types of questions and their answers with short explanations.
Following is a sample quiz; try to attempt any of the given answers:
Q 1- The Java programming language was developed by which of the following :
A- Google in 1990s
B- Micorsoft in 1980s
C- Sun Microsystems in 1995
D- None of the Above
Answer : C
Explanation
Java was developed by James Gosling at Sun Microsystems and it was released in May 1995 as a core component of Sun Microsystems' Java platform.
Start your online quizStart Java Quiz.
Download Java
Java's latest version can be downloaded from Oracle's official website:Java Downloads
Java Certification
Get certified in Java to boost your skills and careerGet certified
Frequently Asked Questions about Java Tutorial
There are some important frequently asked questions (FAQs) about Java Programming tutorial, this section lists them down along with their answers briefly - −
1. What are the 4 important concepts in Java?
2. What are the benefits of Java?
Java is free and open source
Java is community driven and has expert leadership
Java is fast and high-performance
Java is easy to learn
Java is statically typed
Java is object-oriented
Java supports functional programming
3. How much time will it take to learn Java?
4. Why is Java a so popular programming language?
5. What are the advantages of Java over Python?
6. How do I start learning Java?
Here is the summarized list of tips that you can follow to start learning Java:
First and most important is to make your mind to learn Java.
Install Java Virtual Machine and Java Compilers on your computer system.
Follow our tutorial step by step, starting from the very beginning.
Read more articles, watch online courses, or buy a book on Java to enhance your knowledge in Java.
Try to develop small software using Java and other technologies like MySQL if you want to make use of a database.
7. What are Java Technologies for Web Applications?
Java provides the following technologies to help web development:
Java Servlet API.
JavaServer Pages Standard Tag Library.
JavaServer Faces Technology.
Java Message Service API.
JDBC API.
Java Persistence API.
Java Naming and Directory Interface.
NetBeans IDE.
8. Which is the best place to learn Java?

C++ Home
C++ Overview
C++ Environment Setup
C++ Basic Syntax
C++ Comments
C++ Hello World
C++ Omitting Namespace
C++ Tokens
C++ Constants/Literals
C++ Keywords
C++ Identifiers
C++ Data Types
C++ Numeric Data Types
C++ Character Data Type
C++ Boolean Data Type
C++ Variable Types
C++ Variable Scope
C++ Multiple Variables
C++ Basic Input/Output
C++ Modifier Types
C++ Storage Classes
C++ Numbers
C++ Enumeration
C++ Enum Class
C++ References
C++ Date & Time
C++ Operators
C++ Arithmetic Operators
C++ Relational Operators
C++ Logical Operators
C++ Bitwise Operators
C++ Assignment Operators
C++ sizeof Operator
C++ Conditional Operator
C++ Comma Operator
C++ Member Operators
C++ Casting Operators
C++ Pointer Operators
C++ Operators Precedence
C++ Unary Operators
C++ Control Statements
C++ Decision Making
C++ if Statement
C++ if else Statement
C++ Nested if Statements
C++ switch Statement
C++ Nested switch Statements
C++ Loop Types
C++ while Loop
C++ for Loop
C++ do while Loop
C++ Foreach Loop
C++ Nested Loops
C++ break Statement
C++ continue Statement
C++ goto Statement
C++ Strings
C++ Strings
C++ Loop Through a String
C++ String Length
C++ String Concatenation
C++ String Comparison
C++ Functions
C++ Functions
C++ Multiple Function Parameters
C++ Recursive Function
C++ Return Values
C++ Function Overloading
C++ Function Overriding
C++ Default Arguments
C++ Arrays
C++ Arrays
C++ Multidimensional Arrays
C++ Pointer to an Array
C++ Passing Arrays to Functions
C++ Return Array from Functions
C++ Structure & Union
C++ Structures
C++ Unions
C++ Pointers
C++ Pointers
C++ Dereferencing
C++ Modify Pointers
C++ Class and Objects
C++ Object Oriented
C++ Classes & Objects
C++ Class Member Functions
C++ Class Access Modifiers
C++ Static Class Members
C++ Static Data Members
C++ Static Member Function
C++ Inline Functions
C++ this Pointer
C++ Friend Functions
C++ Pointer to Classes
C++ Constructors
C++ Constructor & Destructor
C++ Default Constructors
C++ Parameterized Constructors
C++ Copy Constructor
C++ Constructor Overloading
C++ Constructor with Default Arguments
C++ Delegating Constructors
C++ Constructor Initialization List
C++ Dynamic Initialization Using Constructors
C++ Inheritance
C++ Inheritance
C++ Multiple Inheritance
C++ Multilevel Inheritance
C++ Object-oriented
C++ Overloading
C++ Polymorphism
C++ Abstraction
C++ Encapsulation
C++ Interfaces
C++ Virtual Function
C++ Pure Virtual Functions & Abstract Classes
C++ File Handling
C++ Files and Streams
C++ Reading From File
C++ Advanced
C++ Exception Handling
C++ Dynamic Memory
C++ Namespaces
C++ Templates
C++ Preprocessor
C++ Signal Handling
C++ Multithreading
C++ Web Programming
C++ Socket Programming
C++ Concurrency
C++ Advanced Concepts
C++ Lambda Expression
C++ unordered_multiset
C++ Useful Resources
C++ Questions and Answers
C++ Quick Guide
C++ Cheatsheet
C++ STL Tutorial
C++ Standard Library
C++ Useful Resources
C++ Discussion
C++ Online Compiler
Selected Reading
UPSC IAS Exams Notes
Developer's Best Practices
Questions and Answers
Effective Resume Writing
AI Based Resume Builder
Personal AI Study Assistant
Generate Coding Logic
HR Interview Questions
Computer Glossary
Who is Who
C++ Tutorial
This C++ tutorial has been written by experienced C++ programmers, which helps beginners to advanced programmers while learning C++ in simple and easy steps. This tutorial uses a simple and practical approach to describe the concepts ofC++to software engineers.
What is C++?
C++is a middle-level programming language developed by Bjarne Stroustrup starting in 1979 at Bell Labs.C++runs on a variety of platforms, such as Windows, Mac OS, and the various versions of UNIX. C++ is an extension of theC programming languagewith object-oriented programming concepts. Or, we can say, "C++ is a superset of C programming with additional implementation of object-oriented concepts".
Why to Learn C++
C++is an important programming language for students and working professionals to become great software developers. I will list down some of the key advantages of learning C++:
C++ is very close to hardware, so you get a chance to work at a low level, which gives you a lot of control in terms of memory management, better performance, and finally, robust software development.
C++ programminggives you a clear understanding of object-oriented programming. You will understand low level implementation of polymorphism when you implement virtual tables and virtual table pointers, or dynamic type identification.
C++ is one of the evergreen programming languages and is loved by millions of software developers. If you are a great C++ programmer, then you will never sit without work, and more importantly, you will get highly paid for your work.
C++ is the most widely used programming language in application and system programming. So you can choose your area of interest in software development.
C++ really teaches you the difference between compiler, linker, and loader, different data types, storage classes, variable types, their scopes, etc.
There are 1000s of good reasons to learn C++ programming. But one thing is for sure: to learn any programming language, not only C++, you just need to code and code and finally code until you become an expert.
Hello, World! Program Using C++
Just to give you a little excitement aboutC++ programming, I'm going to give you a small conventional C++ Hello World program, You can try it by clicking on "Edit & Run".
Below is the code to print "Hello World" on the screen −
#include <iostream>
using namespace std;

// main() is where program execution begins.
int main() {
   cout << "Hello, World!"; // prints Hello, World!
   return 0;
}
C++ Online Compiler
We provided an easy, user-friendly, and fast C++ online compiler, where you can write, save, run, and share your C++ programs. Click on this link to open it:C++ Online Compiler.
Try to click the iconto run the following C++ code to print conventional "Hello, World!" using C++ programming.
#include <iostream>
using namespace std;

int main() {
   cout << "Hello, World!"; // prints Hello, World!
   return 0;
}
There are many C++ compilers available that you can use to compile and run the above-mentioned program:
Apple C++. Xcode
Bloodshed Dev-C++
Clang C++
Cygwin (GNU C++)
Mentor Graphics
MINGW - "Minimalist GNU for Windows"
GNU CC source
IBM C++
Intel C++
Microsoft Visual C++
Oracle C++
HP C++
Features of C++
The following are the features of C++ programming language −
C language compatibility: C++ provides backward compatibility with C; it supports allfeatures of C language.
Object-oriented programming: C++ supports the concepts of OOPs such asobjects & classes,encapsulation, data binding,inheritance, andpolymorphism.
Compiled language:C++ is a compiler language where the complete code is converted into machine language, which makes it a faster programming language.
Standard template library:C++ provides many data structures and algorithms-related library collections, such as template libraries for contains, iterators, algorithms, etc.
Dynamic memory management: C++ provides two operatorsnewanddeletethat help to allocate and deallocate memory blocks dynamically.
Exception handling: C++ provides try, catch, and throw blocks for exceptional handling, which were not available in C programming.
Applications of C++ Programming
As mentioned before, C++ is one of the most widely used programming languages. It has its presence in almost every area of software development. I'm going to list a few of them here:
Application Software Development- C++ programming has been used in developing almost all the majorOperating Systemslike Windows, Mac OSX and Linux. Apart from the operating systems,  the core part of many browsers, like Mozilla Firefox and Chrome have been written using C++. C++ also has been used in developing the most popular database system calledMySQL.
Programming Languages Development- C++ has been used extensively in developing new programming languages likeC#,Java,JavaScript,Perl, UNIX's C Shell,PHP,Python, and Verilog, etc.
Computation Programming- C++ is the best friend of scientists because of its fast speed and computational efficiencies.
Games Development- C++ is extremely fast, which allows programmers to do procedural programming for CPU-intensive functions and provides greater control over hardware, because of which it has been widely used in the development of gaming engines.
Embedded System- C++ is being heavily used in developing medical and engineering applications like software for MRI machines, high-end CAD/CAM systems, etc.
This list goes on. There are various areas where software developers are happily using C++ to provide great software. I highly recommend you learn C++ and contribute great software to the community.
Learn C++ By Examples
Practicing C++ examples is the best way to learn C++ programming. All chapters of our C++ tutorial have the related examples with explanation. You can simply go through those examples to understand the concept better.
Jobs or Careers in C++
C++ is a versatile and widely used programming language. Here is the list of some job roles that you can get after learning C++ programming:
Software Engineer
Game Developer
Systems Programmer
Embedded System Developer
Robotics Engineer
Database Developer
Graphics Programmer
Here is the list of the companies hiring C++ developers:
Microsoft
Amazon
Facebook
IBM
Adobe
Apple
Google
Target Audience - Who should Learn C++?
ThisC++ tutorialhas been prepared for the beginners to help them understand the basics to advanced concepts of the C++ programming language. This tutorial is useful for software and game developers, embedded system developers, system programmers, students, and educators/trainers. After completing this tutorial, you will have a great level of expertise in C++ programming, from which you can take yourself to the next level.
Prerequisites to Learn C++
Before you start practicing with various types of examples given in this C++ tutorial, we are making the assumption that you are already aware of the basics of computer programming and computer programming language. You should also be familiar with −
C++ Compiler
IDE
Text Editor
C++ Practice
After completing the C++ tutorial, you can go through these sections to practice the concepts that you have learned:
C++ Interview Questions
C++ Online Quiz
C++ Online Test
C++ Mock Test
C++ Library Reference
The following list has the complete reference of C++ header files −
C++ <fstream>
C++ <iomanip>
C++ <ios>
C++ <iosfwd>
C++ <iostream>
C++ <istream>
C++ <ostream>
C++ <sstream>
C++ <streambuf>
C++ <atomic>
C++ <complex>
C++ <exception>
C++ <functional>
C++ <limits>
C++ <locale>
C++ <memory>
C++ <new>
C++ <numeric>
C++ <regex>
C++ <stdexcept>
C++ <string>
C++ <thread>
C++ <tuple>
C++ <typeinfo>
C++ <utility>
C++ <valarray>
C++ STL Library Reference
The following list has the complete reference of C++ STL libraries −
C++ <array>
C++ <bitset>
C++ <deque>
C++ <forward_list>
C++ <list>
C++ <map>
C++ <multimap>
C++ <queue>
C++ <priority_queue>
C++ <set>
C++ <stack>
C++ <unordered_map>
C++ <unordered_set>
C++ <vector>
C++ <algorithm>
C++ <iterator>
C++ Revision
For a quick revision of C++ programming, go through these links −
C++ Quick Guide
C++ Cheat Sheet
C++ STL Cheat Sheet
C++ Questions & Answers
Explore the latest C++ questions and answers atC++ questions and answers
FAQs on C++ Tutorial
1. What is the easiest way to learn C++ programming?
2. Is prior knowledge of any programming is required to learn C++?
3. What are the important concepts of C++ programming?
Some of the important concepts of C++ programming are:
Conditional statements
Looping
Arrays
Structures
Class and objects
Inheritance
Polymorphism
C++ Standard Template Library
4. How much time required to learn C++ programming?
5. Who developed C++ programming language?
6. What was the original name of C++?

C - Home
C - Overview
C - Features
C - History
C - Environment Setup
C - Program Structure
C - Hello World
C - Compilation Process
C - Comments
C - Tokens
C - Keywords
C - Identifiers
C - User Input
C - Basic Syntax
C - Data Types
C - Variables
C - Integer Promotions
C - Type Conversion
C - Type Casting
C - Booleans
Constants and Literals in C
C - Constants
C - Literals
C - Escape sequences
C - Format Specifiers
Operators in C
C - Operators
C - Arithmetic Operators
C - Relational Operators
C - Logical Operators
C - Bitwise Operators
C - Assignment Operators
C - Unary Operators
C - Increment and Decrement Operators
C - Ternary Operator
C - sizeof Operator
C - Operator Precedence
C - Misc Operators
Decision Making in C
C - Decision Making
C - if statement
C - if...else statement
C - nested if statements
C - switch statement
C - nested switch statements
Loops in C
C - Loops
C - While loop
C - For loop
C - Do...while loop
C - Nested loop
C - Infinite loop
C - Break Statement
C - Continue Statement
C - goto Statement
Functions in C
C - Functions
C - Main Function
C - Function call by Value
C - Function call by reference
C - Nested Functions
C - Variadic Functions
C - User-Defined Functions
C - Callback Function
C - Return Statement
C - Recursion
Scope Rules in C
C - Scope Rules
C - Static Variables
C - Global Variables
Arrays in C
C - Arrays
C - Properties of Array
C - Multi-Dimensional Arrays
C - Passing Arrays to Function
C - Return Array from Function
C - Variable Length Arrays
Pointers in C
C - Pointers
C - Pointers and Arrays
C - Applications of Pointers
C - Pointer Arithmetics
C - Array of Pointers
C - Pointer to Pointer
C - Passing Pointers to Functions
C - Return Pointer from Functions
C - Function Pointers
C - Pointer to an Array
C - Pointers to Structures
C - Chain of Pointers
C - Pointer vs Array
C - Character Pointers and Functions
C - NULL Pointer
C - void Pointer
C - Dangling Pointers
C - Dereference Pointer
C - Near, Far and Huge Pointers
C - Initialization of Pointer Arrays
C - Pointers vs. Multi-dimensional Arrays
Strings in C
C - Strings
C - Array of Strings
C - Special Characters
C Structures and Unions
C - Structures
C - Structures and Functions
C - Arrays of Structures
C - Self-Referential Structures
C - Lookup Tables
C - Dot (.) Operator
C - Enumeration (or enum)
C - Structure Padding and Packing
C - Nested Structures
C - Anonymous Structure and Union
C - Unions
C - Bit Fields
C - Typedef
File Handling in C
C - Input & Output
C - File I/O (File Handling)
C Preprocessors
C - Preprocessors
C - Pragmas
C - Preprocessor Operators
C - Macros
C - Header Files
Memory Management in C
C - Memory Management
C - Memory Address
C - Storage Classes
Miscellaneous Topics
C - Error Handling
C - Variable Arguments
C - Command Execution
C - Math Functions
C - Static Keyword
C - Random Number Generation
C - Command Line Arguments
C Programming Resources
C -  Questions & Answers
C -  Quick Guide
C -  Cheat Sheet
C - Useful Resources
C - Discussion
C Online Compiler
Selected Reading
UPSC IAS Exams Notes
Developer's Best Practices
Questions and Answers
Effective Resume Writing
AI Based Resume Builder
Personal AI Study Assistant
Generate Coding Logic
HR Interview Questions
Computer Glossary
Who is Who
C Tutorial
C Tutorial
Why to Learn C Programming?
Facts about C
C Hello World
C Compiler
C Applications
C Audiences
C Prerequisites
FAQs on C Programming
C Tutorial
C programmingis a general-purpose, procedural, imperative computer programming language developed in 1972 by Dennis M. Ritchie at the Bell Telephone Laboratories to develop the UNIX operating system. C is the most widely used computer language. It keeps fluctuating at number one scale of popularity along with Java programming language, which is also equally popular and most widely used among modern software programmers.
Why to Learn C Programming?
C programminglanguage is a MUST for students and working professionals to become a great Software Engineer specially when they are working in Software Development Domain. Here are some of the important reasons why you should learn C Programming −
It is a structured programming language and you can use the skills learned in C to master other programming languages.
It is a structured programming language and you can use the skills learned in C to master other programming languages.
You can use C program to write efficient codes and develop robust projects.
You can use C program to write efficient codes and develop robust projects.
C is a low-level language and you can use it to interact more directly with the computer's hardware and memory.
C is a low-level language and you can use it to interact more directly with the computer's hardware and memory.
Facts about C
C is the most widely used and popular System Programming Language. Most of the state-of-the-art software have been implemented using C. Here are some facts about the C language:
C was invented to write an operating system called UNIX. The UNIX OS was totally written in C.
C was invented to write an operating system called UNIX. The UNIX OS was totally written in C.
C is a successor of B language which was introduced around the early 1970s.
C is a successor of B language which was introduced around the early 1970s.
The language was formalized in 1988 by the American National Standard Institute (ANSI).
The language was formalized in 1988 by the American National Standard Institute (ANSI).
Hello World using C Programming
Just to give you a little excitement aboutC programming, I'm going to give you a small conventional C Programming Hello World program. You can run it here using the "Edit and Run" button.
#include <stdio.h>

int main() {

   /* my first program in C */
   printf("Hello, World! \n");
   
   return 0;
}
C Compiler
We provided an easy, user-friendly, and fast C online compiler, where you can write, save, run, and share your C programs. Click on this link to open it:C Online Compiler.
Applications of C Programming
C was initially used for system development work, particularly the programs that make-up the operating system. C was adopted as a system development language because it produces code that runs nearly as fast as the code written in assembly language. Some examples of the use of C are -
Operating Systems
Operating Systems
Language Compilers
Language Compilers
Assemblers
Assemblers
Text Editors
Text Editors
Print Spoolers
Print Spoolers
Network Drivers
Network Drivers
Modern Programs
Modern Programs
Databases
Databases
Language Interpreters
Language Interpreters
Utilities
Utilities
Audience
This tutorial is designed for software programmers with a need to understand theC programminglanguage starting from scratch. ThisC tutorialwill give you enough understanding on C programming language from where you can take yourself to higher level of expertise.
Prerequisites
Before proceeding with this tutorial, you should have a basic understanding of Computer Programming terminologies. A basic understanding of any of the programming languages will help you in understanding theC programmingconcepts and move fast on the learning track.
FAQs on C Programming
There are some very Frequently Asked Questions(FAQ) about C, this section tries to answer them briefly.
C programming came into being in 1972. After more than 5 decades, C is still one of the most popular languages that ranks consistently in the top three. Since C can directly interact with the hardware, it is primarily used in low-level applications such as building operating systems, device drivers, embedded systems, networking etc.
Therefore, C programming skills are very much in demand, in this age also. Ones career prospects will definitely brighter if he has a good proficiency in C programming.
C is a general-purpose programming language; therefore, it can be used to develop any type of applications. However, its ability to interact with the hardware makes it more suitable for developing system utilities, compilers and device drivers.
C is predominantly used in building embedded systems and networking applications. C is significantly faster as compared to languages like Java or Python because it is directly compiled to the machine code. Hence, it is used in development of gaming applications.
C is a versatile programming language that can be useful in development of a variety of software applications.
C is considered to be one of the easiest programming languages to learn for beginners. You can learn programming in C with the help of many online resources, such as the C tutorial provided by TutorialsPointcprogramming.
C does have a slightly steeper learning curve when you go towards advanced concepts. For attaining a high level of proficiency in C, you need to be able to master the features such as pointers, structures etc. Learning C allows you to build sound foundation with which you can easily learn other programming technologies.
Here are some of the main advantages of learning C programming:
C is a compiled language. It is translated directly into the machine language. Thats why the code execution is faster. Thus C offers better efficiency as compared to Java, Python. This fature is advantageous in applications like system utilities, embedded systems game development etc.
C is a general-purpose language. Hence, it can be used to develop a variety of applications.
C code easily portable. C compilers are available on all the operating system platforms. Hence, you can build an executable on relevant OS without many changes to the code.
C is called as a middle-level language. It has all the advantages of a high level language, plus it can perform low-level memory manipulations.
A good expertise in C lets you to learn other languages very easily.
C programming language has a lot of important features that make it a unique language.
Compiled language− Unlike many of the modern languages, C is a compiled language. The compiler builds a machine level code that is directly executed by the processor. Hence, it provides a better performance.
Pointer mechanism− C has the ability to directly access the computers memory through its pointer mechanism. This leads to its ability to control the hardware  a feature that is useful in developing system utilities and embedded systems.
Functions− You can develop an application in a structured and modular manner with the help of functions. The mechanism of calling functions can be easily plugged into one another.
Extensible− C has the feature of defining a new data type by combining any of the built-in types. You can thus simulate real-life data structures with C code.
Library functions− C software is bundled with a large library of utility functions and macros. There are library functions for IO operations, string handling, mathematical and statistical functions, time related functions etc.
Every programming language has its own characteristic features and difference with others. Here are some of the key points of difference between C and other languages:
C is a compiled language, whereas programming languages like Python, Java and JavaScript are interpreted languages.
C is a statically typed language. On the other hand, Python and JavaScript are dynamically typed languages.
C is an imperative and procedural language. It doesnt support classes and objects. Modern languages are primarily object-oriented.
C doesnt have automatic garbage collection mechanism, which is provided by many other languages like Java and Python.
A reasonable proficiency in C can be of a lot of advantage for anybody who wants to build a career in software development. C being a general-purpose language, you can use it in different practice projects. C is an open-source language. You can also contribute to open source software development project, that will give you lot of exposure.
A C programmer can pursue a successful career in embedded system development and gaming field. C language acts as a gateway to the software development field, as you can diversify into other programming technologies.