Courses
Placement
Data ScienceIBM
GATE
Practice
Our website uses cookies
All Courses
Live
Complete Machine Learning & Data Science Program
TheComplete Machine Learning & Data Science Programis a comprehensive live course designed to take you from beginner to expert in machine learning and data science. Explore a 360-degree learning experience designed for geeks who wish to get hands-on Data Science and ML. Mentored by industry experts; learn to apply DS methods and techniques, and acquire analytical skills. Join us to gain practical knowledge andbecome proficient in Data Science.
Master Machine Learning & Data Science at just INR 3999 and Earn Certifications!For further queries, reach us via Call/WhatsApp at: +91-9315258643
Course Overview
ML and Data Science Live Course - Overview
The Complete Machine Learning & Data Science Program by GeeksforGeeks is an all-encompassing course designed to take you from a beginner to an advanced level in the world ofdata scienceandmachine learning.
This6-month live Data Science courseis perfect for tech enthusiasts, students, and professionals alike who are eager to gain hands-on experience in the data science field. The complete Data Science course covers a wide array of topics, starting with Python programming basics and essential data science libraries like Numpy and Pandas.
Learn data analytics, machine learning algorithms, and AI concepts, ensuring you build a strong foundation. You will also explore specialized areas like deep learning, image processing, and natural language processing (NLP). With 20+ programming tools and libraries, 40+ industry-relevant projects, and live sessions with industry mentors, this Complete Machine Learning & Data Science Program provides a robust and practical learning experience.
NOTE - All sales are final, no refunds will be provided for offline and live courses.However, if needed, participants may be allowed to shift to a different batch of the same course, subject to availability and course policies.
Machine Learning & Data Science Course - Highlights
20+ Programming Tools & Libraries
40+ Industry Projects
Weekly Live Session with Industry Mentor
Regular Live Doubt Solving Sessions with Industry Expert
Career Essential Soft Skills Program
Designed for both Students & Working Professionals
Career Guidance Session
6 months of one-on-one 24X7 Doubt Assistance
SupplementaryCertification Questionsmaterials provided for certifications such asGoogle, AWS, and IBM.
Projects We Covered:
Black Friday Sales Data Analysis
Data Visualization on Heart Disease Dataset
What Sets Us Apart
Project-Based Learning
24 X 7 Doubt Support
Expert Mentors
Hands-on, practical exercises designed to enhance your learning experience and reinforce the concepts covered in the course. These projects serve as crucial components in the learning journey, as they allow you to apply the knowledge and skills gained in real-world scenarios.Eg: Wikipedia Scraper, PubG Predictive Analysis, Spell Checker& many more.Readmore
Hands-on, practical exercises designed to enhance your learning experience and reinforce the concepts covered in the course. These projects serve as crucial components in the learning journey, as they allow you to apply the knowledge and skills gained in real-world scenarios.Eg: Wikipedia Scraper, PubG Predictive Analysis, Spell Checker& many more.
What Sets Us Apart
Hands-on, practical exercises designed to enhance your learning experience and reinforce the concepts covered in the course. These projects serve as crucial componen
A dedicated service provided with this course for freeto help you overcome any doubt, at any time, and anywhere. So unlea
With a passion for teaching, our mentor(s) sessions will providetailored guidance to all the aspiring coders. Launch a successful tech career with
Course Content
Introducing Python - Python Basics, Operators, Loops, Functions, Strings, List, Tuples, Dictionary, Set, Object-oriented concepts(OOPs) and much more.
Introducing Python - Python Basics, Operators, Loops, Functions, Strings, List, Tuples, Dictionary, Set, Object-oriented concepts(OOPs) and much more.
Data Toolkit - Getting started with Files, Inventory Management System with Files, Inventory Management System with JSON, Mastering Numpy Arrays, Getting Started with OS , Jupyter Notebook Setup, OS with Python, etc.
Data Toolkit - Getting started with Files, Inventory Management System with Files, Inventory Management System with JSON, Mastering Numpy Arrays, Getting Started with OS , Jupyter Notebook Setup, OS with Python, etc.
Libraries - Numpy, Pandas, Matplotlib, Streamlit, etc.
Libraries - Numpy, Pandas, Matplotlib, Streamlit, etc.
Maths for Data Analysis: Basic Probability for Data Science, Statistics, Probability Distribution, Inferential Statistics, and much more
Maths for Data Analysis: Basic Probability for Data Science, Statistics, Probability Distribution, Inferential Statistics, and much more
Maths for ML & AI: System of Linear Equation, Matrix, Vectors, and Calculus, etc
Maths for ML & AI: System of Linear Equation, Matrix, Vectors, and Calculus, etc
Data Analysis with Python: Getting started with Pandas, Data Preprocessing with Google Play store, Introduction to EDA, Data Cleaning, Data Visualization, Data AnalysisProjects: Sugarcane Production, Black Friday Sales Data Analysis, Data Visualization on Heart Disease Dataset, GDP Analysis
Data Analysis with Python: Getting started with Pandas, Data Preprocessing with Google Play store, Introduction to EDA, Data Cleaning, Data Visualization, Data Analysis
Projects: Sugarcane Production, Black Friday Sales Data Analysis, Data Visualization on Heart Disease Dataset, GDP Analysis
Excel: Exploring Data, Preparing Data, Analysing Data, Important Interview QuestionsProjects: Sales Data Analysis Using Covered Functions and Pivot Tables
Excel: Exploring Data, Preparing Data, Analysing Data, Important Interview Questions
Projects: Sales Data Analysis Using Covered Functions and Pivot Tables
Power BI - Introduction to Power BI, Understanding Parameters, Basic Plots, Fundamentals of Power BI, Designing the Plots, etcProjects: Superstore Sales Analysis Dashboard, Covid-19 World Dashboard
Power BI - Introduction to Power BI, Understanding Parameters, Basic Plots, Fundamentals of Power BI, Designing the Plots, etc
Projects: Superstore Sales Analysis Dashboard, Covid-19 World Dashboard
Web Scraping - Learn how to Scrape, Selenium, Image Dataset Creation, and much moreProjects: Wikipedia Scraper, Youtube Scrapper, Stock Images Infinite Scroll
Web Scraping - Learn how to Scrape, Selenium, Image Dataset Creation, and much more
Projects: Wikipedia Scraper, Youtube Scrapper, Stock Images Infinite Scroll
SQL - Databases Fundamentals, SQL Fundamentals, Data Manipulation(DML), Querying, Intermediate SQL Queries, Joining and combining Data, Set Theory Clauses, Subqueries, Window Functions, Data Preprocessing and analysis
SQL - Databases Fundamentals, SQL Fundamentals, Data Manipulation(DML), Querying, Intermediate SQL Queries, Joining and combining Data, Set Theory Clauses, Subqueries, Window Functions, Data Preprocessing and analysis
Introduction to AI, How Data Science Comes into Play,
Introduction to AI, How Data Science Comes into Play,
Linear Regression, Multiple Linear Regression & Polynomial Linear Regression,
Linear Regression, Multiple Linear Regression & Polynomial Linear Regression,
Support Vector Machines, Decision Trees, Random Forests,
Support Vector Machines, Decision Trees, Random Forests,
Classification Algorithms, Clustering Algorithms, Feature Engineering, and much more
Classification Algorithms, Clustering Algorithms, Feature Engineering, and much more
Upcoming Batches
Reviews and Ratings
Reviews and Ratings
Frequently Asked Questions
What are the benefits of a machine learning and data science program?
How can a machine learning and data science program help me advance my career?
What career opportunities are available after completing a machine learning and data science program?
How will these classes be conducted?
Is there any number to contact for query?
How does the admission process work for this course?
How long will the course content be available for?
Can I make the payment through PayPal?
How doubt support feature works?
What is Data Science?
What is Machine Learning?
Why should I learn Data Science and Machine Learning?
What are some common applications of Data Science and Machine Learning?
What are some common tools used in Data Science and Machine Learning?
Is Data Science hard to learn?
What kind of jobs can I get with Data Science and Machine Learning skills?
Can I learn Data Science and Machine Learning online?
How do I keep my skills up to date in Data Science and Machine Learning?

[Images saved with this article:]
media.geeksforgeeks.org_img-practice_prod_courses_22_Web_Header_Frame_2013_t_1747487514.png