Courses
Placement
Data ScienceIBM
GATE
Practice
Our website uses cookies
All Courses
Live
GfG 160 - 160 Days of Problem Solving (With Summer Workshops)
Master one DSA problem daily withGfG 160!Join this free 160-Day program which will help you practice DSA problems in a structured and organized manner. Getin-depth articles, step-by-step video explanations and access to additional bonus problemswith video solutions. Recommended for: Students & Professionals. Along with the DSA content, now get free access to exclusive workshops on trending technologies such asFull-Stack development, Data Science, DevOps & more.
Flat discount active on all GeeksforGeeks Courses.Avail today by clicking here!
Course Overview
What is GfG 160:Solve handpicked coding problems daily for the next 160 days and master DSA in astructured and organized manner.No need for random SDE sheets anymore!Practice topic-wise DSA Problems with this 160 Day roadmap that will help you improve your DSA skills with additional problems and teach you approaches in a structured manner. So for the next 160 days, just solve the problems in the order recommended in this course to enhance your DSA skills. (See the Detailed Course Syllabus PDF below to check out the flow in which problems will be solved).
Recommended for:Anyone looking to prepare for coding interviews, improve their DSA knowledge, or enhance their programming abilities.The additional Career workshops are a bonus for you to learn about the trending tech stacks and their career scopes.
Whats New: Summer Skill Up Sprint Series -Register today to know the full schedule of the workshops!
What else you are getting in this:
160 Handpicked DSA Problems:Each problem comes with a detailed article and a video explanation for thorough understanding.
90 Bonus Problems:Extra practice problems with video solutions which makes atotal of 250 Problems.
Completion Certificate:Receive a certificate upon successfully finishing the course, validating your skills and knowledge in the field.
Concept Coverage:Includes problems on key topics like Arrays, Strings, Sorting, Searching, Matrix, Hashing, Two Pointer Technique, Prefix Sum, and more.
Perfect for Coding Interviews:Ideal for those preparing for interviews or looking to deepen their knowledge of DSA.
Assured Rewards:Get rewarded for your consistency.
Organized Learning:Solve in a structured manner created for best learning outcome.
Career Roadmap Sessions:Free extra workshops on trending techs such as DevOps, Software testing, Full Stack & more for a complete guided experience.
Course Content
Frequently Asked Questions
What is GfG 160
What if I have already claimed a Bag?
Who is this course for ?
Is DSA hard to learn?
Is GfG 160 Free?
What programming languages are best for learning DSA?
How does DSA help in coding interviews?
Is there a contact number available for inquiries?