ReactJS - Home
ReactJS - Introduction
ReactJS - Roadmap
ReactJS - Installation
ReactJS - Features
ReactJS - Advantages & Disadvantages
ReactJS - Architecture
ReactJS - Creating a React Application
ReactJS - JSX
ReactJS - Components
ReactJS - Nested Components
ReactJS - Using Newly Created Components
ReactJS - Component Collection
ReactJS - Styling
ReactJS - Properties (props)
ReactJS - Creating Components using Properties
ReactJS - props Validation
ReactJS - Constructor
ReactJS - Component Life Cycle
ReactJS - Event management
ReactJS - Creating an Event−Aware Component
ReactJS - Introduce Events in Expense Manager APP
ReactJS - State Management
ReactJS - State Management API
ReactJS - Stateless Component
ReactJS - State Management Using React Hooks
ReactJS - Component Life Cycle Using React Hooks
ReactJS - Layout Component
ReactJS - Pagination
ReactJS - Material UI
ReactJS - Http client programming
ReactJS - Form Programming
ReactJS - Controlled Component
ReactJS - Uncontrolled Component
ReactJS - Formik
ReactJS - Conditional Rendering
ReactJS - Lists
ReactJS - Keys
ReactJS - Routing
ReactJS - Redux
ReactJS - Animation
ReactJS - Bootstrap
ReactJS - Map
ReactJS - Table
ReactJS - Managing State Using Flux
ReactJS - Testing
ReactJS - CLI Commands
ReactJS - Building and Deployment
ReactJS - Example
Hooks
ReactJS - Introduction to Hooks
ReactJS - Using useState
ReactJS - Using useEffect
ReactJS - Using useContext
ReactJS - Using useRef
ReactJS - Using useReducer
ReactJS - Using useCallback
ReactJS - Using useMemo
ReactJS - Custom Hooks
ReactJS Advanced
ReactJS - Accessibility
ReactJS - Code Splitting
ReactJS - Context
ReactJS - Error Boundaries
ReactJS - Forwarding Refs
ReactJS - Fragments
ReactJS - Higher Order Components
ReactJS - Integrating With Other Libraries
ReactJS - Optimizing Performance
ReactJS - Profiler API
ReactJS - Portals
ReactJS - React Without ES6 ECMAScript
ReactJS - React Without JSX
ReactJS - Reconciliation
ReactJS - Refs and the DOM
ReactJS - Render Props
ReactJS - Static Type Checking
ReactJS - Strict Mode
ReactJS - Web Components
Additional Concepts
ReactJS - Date Picker
ReactJS - Helmet
ReactJS - Inline Style
ReactJS - PropTypes
ReactJS - BrowserRouter
ReactJS - DOM
ReactJS - Carousel
ReactJS - Icons
ReactJS - Form Components
ReactJS - Reference API
ReactJS Useful Resources
ReactJS - Quick Guide
ReactJS Cheatsheet
Axios CheatSheet
ReactJS - Useful Resources
ReactJS - Discussion
Selected Reading
UPSC IAS Exams Notes
Developer's Best Practices
Questions and Answers
Effective Resume Writing
AI Based Resume Builder
Personal AI Study Assistant
Generate Coding Logic
HR Interview Questions
Computer Glossary
Who is Who
ReactJS Tutorial
What is ReactJS?
Who should learn ReactJS?
Why Learn ReactJS?
ReactJS Example Code
Features of ReactJS
Prerequisites to Learn ReactJS
Getting Started with ReactJS
ReactJS Jobs and Salary
Frequently Asked Questions on ReactJS
This ReactJS tutorial includes all of the most recent updates up to version 18.2.0 and covers every topic, from fundamental to advanced. React is the most recommended JavScript library to learn now because of its core foundation of features and large community.
What is ReactJS?
ReactJS is an open-source JavaScript library for building dynamic and interactive user interfaces(UIs). React is developed and released byFacebook. Facebook is continuously working on the React library and enhancing it by fixing bugs and introducing new features.
Who should learn ReactJS?
This tutorial is prepared for beginners to working professionals who are aspiring to make a career in the field of developing front-end web applications. This tutorial is intended to make you comfortable in getting started with the React concepts with examples.
Why Learn ReactJS?
There are several reasons to learn ReactJS, as per the demand in the development industry of React developers and features React has to offer that can not be replaced by other frameworks or libraries.
Ease of Use:ReactJS does not require writing lengthy codes as it supports the Components concept so a small amount of code can be created and can be used in multiple places.
Multiple Module Support:There are so many modules in ReactJS that can be used to make your development more scalable, and manageable at a fast pace.
Multiple Apps Development:By using React knowledge we can create Web Pages, Web Apps, Mobile Apps, and VR Apps. There are a lot of websites that are using ReactJS like Airbnb, Cloudflare, Facebook, Instagram, etc.
Easy Migration:Because of its easy learning curve migration from other technologies became so easy. There are tons of resources to learn ReactJS from basics to advanced.
Large Community:ReactJS has one of the largest communities to help you when you are in trouble debugging your codes or get stuck learning new things.
ReactJS Example Code
As this is sample code without the environment setup this code will not work to set up the ReactJS environment checkReactJS Installationarticle.
import React from 'react';
import ReactDOM from 'react-dom/client';

function Greeting(props) {
return <h1>Welcome to TutorialsPoint</h1>;
}

const container = document.getElementById("root");
const root = ReactDOM.createRoot(container);
root.render(<Greeting />);
Features of ReactJS
ReactJS plays an essential role in the front-end ecosystem. There are so many important features of ReactJS as it is the most demanding library for front-end development.
Virtual DOM:Virtual DOM is a special kind of DOM that is used in ReactJS. Virtual DOM represents the real DOM of the current HTML document. Whenever there is a change in the HTML document, React checks the updated virtual DOM with the previous state of the Virtual DOM and updates only the difference in th actual/real DOM.
Reusable Components:Components need to be written a single time and can be used multiple times by just calling that component where we require that component.
One-Way Data Binding:One-way data binding prevents the data in a component from flowing backward. A component can pass the data to its child component only. This will simplify the data handling and reduce the complexity.
To know more about the features of ReactJS please checkReactJS Featuresarticle.
Prerequisites to Learn ReactJS
Before proceeding with this tutorial, we assume that the readers have the basic knowledge inHTML,CSSandJavaScriptconcepts.
Getting Started with ReactJS
To get started with ReactJS we need to clear our fundamentals first before proceeding into complex topics. We will recommend you to code along with each article you read this will help you to understand the concepts. If you can create a project along with your learning that will be more helpful.
Basics of ReactJS
ReactJS Introduction
ReactJS Installation
ReactJS Features
ReactJS Architecture
ReactJS JSX
ReactJS Application
ReactJS Fragments
ReactJS Conditional Rendering
ReactJS CLI Commands
ReactJS Components
Componentis the heart of ReactJS, it is the building block of a React application. A React component represents a small chunk of user interface in a webpage.
Components
ReactJS - Use Component
ReactJS Nested Components
ReactJS Component Collection
ReactJS Component Using Properties
ReactJS Component Life Cycle
ReactJS Event-Aware Component
ReactJS Stateless Component
ReactJS Layout Component
ReactJS States
State represents the value of the dynamic properties of a React component at a given instance. React provides a dynamic data store for each component.
ReactJS State Management
ReactJS State Management API
ReactJS State Management through Hooks
ReactJS Hooks
Hooks are plain JavaScript functions having access to state and lifecycle events of the component in which it is used. In general, hooks start with the use keyword.
ReactJS Introduction to Hooks
ReactJS useState Hook
ReactJS useEffect Hook
ReactJS useContext Hook
ReactJS useRef Hook
ReactJS useReducer Hook
ReactJS useCallback Hook
ReactJS useMemo Hook
ReactJS Custom Hooks
ReactJS Props
Props are used to pass data between components. In real-world projects we need the components to interact with each other which is not possible with the states as it is private to that particular component.
ReactJS Props
ReactJS Props Validation
Other Important Topics of ReactJS
There are a few more things that you need to know about ReactJS as it is updating itself at a fast pace so you have to keep up with the new features as well. You can check our recently ReactJS published articles on thislink. These articles are not part of our tutorial.
ReactJS Pagination
ReactJS Lists
ReactJS Keys
ReactJS Router
ReactJS Redux
ReactJS Animation
ReactJS Jobs and Salary
ReactJS is popular front-end library in these days. There are a lot compnaies that hire ReactJS developers like facebook, instagram, airbnb, etc.
ReactJS Developer - Salary ranges in between  1.5 Lakhs to  16.0 Lakhs with an average annual salary of  7.3 Lakhs
Frequently Asked Questions on ReactJS
It is a front-end focused JavaScript library mainly used to build single or multi-page web application interfaces.
There is no difference between ReactJS and React both are the same.
React's data flow is much easier than Angular, as it follows one-way data binding as well React also provides some exceptional features that no libraries provide. Because of that, the community of React is larger, so you can get help immediately.
As we said at the beginning of this article, this course is for beginners as well as for advanced.
React.js Articles
You can explore a set of React.js articles atReact.js Articles.

[Images saved with this article:]
www.tutorialspoint.com_reactjs_images_reactjs-mini-logo.jpg
www.tutorialspoint.com_reactjs_images_reactjs.jpg