HTML Graphics
SVG Tutorial
Canvas Tutorial
Canvas Clock
Plotting
Google Maps
HTML Game
SVGTutorial
Learn SVG
SVG stands for Scalable Vector Graphics.
SVG defines vector-based graphics in XML format.
SVG graphics are scalable, and do not lose any quality if they are zoomed or resized.
SVG is supported by all major browsers.
Examples in Each Chapter
With our "Try it Yourself" editor, you can edit the SVG, and click on a button to view the result.
SVG Example
What you should already know
Before you continue, you should have a basic understanding of the following:
HTML
Basic XML
If you want to study these subjects first, find the tutorials on ourHome page.
What is SVG?
SVG stands for Scalable Vector Graphics
SVG is used to define vector-based graphics for the Web
SVG defines graphics in XML format
Each element and attribute in SVG files can be animated
SVG is a W3C recommendation
SVG integrates with other standards, such as CSS, DOM, XSL and JavaScript
SVG is a W3C Recommendation
SVG 1.0 became a W3C Recommendation on 4 September 2001.
SVG 1.1 became a W3C Recommendation on 14 January 2003.
SVG 1.1 (Second Edition) became a W3C Recommendation on 16 August 2011.
SVG Advantages
Advantages of using SVG over other image formats (like JPEG 
and GIF) are:
SVG images can be created and edited with any text editor
SVG images can be searched, indexed, scripted, and compressed
SVG images are scalable
SVG images can be printed with high quality at any resolution
SVG images are zoomable
SVG graphics do NOT lose any quality if they are zoomed or resized
SVG is an open standard
SVG files are pure XML
How does it Work?
SVG has elements and attributes for rectangles, circles, ellipses, lines, 
polygons, curves, and more.
SVG also supports filter and blur effects, gradients, rotations, animations, 
interactivity with JavaScript, and more.
A simple SVG document consists of the <svg> root element and several basic 
shape elements that will build a graphic together.
Creating SVG Images
SVG images can be created with any text editor, or with a drawing program, likeInkscape.
For you to learn the concept and basics of SVG, this tutorial will just use 
plain text to teach you SVG.
The next page shows how to embed an SVG image directly into an HTML page!
COLOR PICKER
Contact Sales
If you want to use W3Schools services as an educational institution, team or enterprise, send us an e-mail:sales@w3schools.com
Report Error
If you want to report an error, or if you want to make a suggestion, send us an e-mail:help@w3schools.com
Top Tutorials
Top References
Top Examples
Get Certified

[Images saved with this article:]
www.w3schools.com_images_img_fa_up_300.png
www.w3schools.com_images_colorpicker2000.png