AppMLTutorial
AppML Cases
AppML Client
AppML Server
AppML Cloud
AppMLReference
AppMLTutorial
AppML Brings Data to HTML
"No Nonsense Web Applications"
Introduction
The Web is growing fast, and the amount of data in Cyberspace is growing even faster.
Every day new information systems are developed, and every day new users are connected,
and data can be accessed 24/7 from anywhere in the world.
Faster and better software development methods are desperately needed.
Along these lines, W3Schools has developed a very flexible technique for retrieving, displaying, and manipulate data,
without the need for traditional programming.
Cooperating with Jan Egil Refsnes, W3schools has developed a vocabulary for defining Web applications.
The vocabulary is called AppML (Application Modeling Language).
AppML uses the most up-to-date techniques and ideas of modern Web development with focus on:
Low Cost
Rapid and Agile Web Develoment
Optimized for Cloud Computing
High Speed and Low Bandwidth Consumption
MVC (Model View Controller) Architecture
Full Separation of Content from Presentation
Highly Scalable and Testable
Easy Configuration and Reconfiguration
AppML supports the functions you find in other frameworks like
React, Angular, and Vue, but AppML is much easier to use, and much easier to understand.
What is AppML?
AppML stands forApplicationModelingLanguage.
AppML is not a programming language. It is descriptive language (a language for describing applications).
It is built around familiar Web application concepts like:
Forms
Lists
Reports
Filters
Functions
Databases
AppML runs in any HTML page. No installation is required.
AppML is a tool for bringing data to HTML applications:
From Objects
From JSON files
From Text files
From XML files
From databases
ObjectsJSON FilesText FilesXML FilesPHP/MySQL
Why AppML?
HTML is not very suitable for describing web applications.
AppML is made for web applications:
AppML extends HTML with dataattributes.
AppML addscontrollersto HTML, to control the behavior of 
HTML data.
AppML is very easy to understand and extraordinarily quick to develop.
AppML Example
This example shows how easy AppML can bring data to HTML:
AppML Example
AppML is a tool for easy, rapid, and agile web application development.
Easy and Agile
On today's market, there are many frameworks (tools or libraries) designed to 
extend HTML.
Most of these frameworks manipulate HTML, CSS or JavaScript in a way that 
makes them difficult to use (especially when used in combination).
AppML is different. You have 
full HTML, CSS, and JavaScript freedom.
AppML makes it easy to create Single Page Applications (SPA) in a very clean 
and efficient way.
Even if you have never worked with web development before, you will find AppML 
very easy to use.
If you are an experienced web developer, you will soon discover 
the power of AppML.
COLOR PICKER
Contact Sales
If you want to use W3Schools services as an educational institution, team or enterprise, send us an e-mail:sales@w3schools.com
Report Error
If you want to report an error, or if you want to make a suggestion, send us an e-mail:help@w3schools.com
Top Tutorials
Top References
Top Examples
Get Certified

[Images saved with this article:]
www.w3schools.com_images_img_fa_up_300.png
www.w3schools.com_images_colorpicker2000.png