Blockchain - Home
Blockchain - Introduction
History of Blockchain
Blockchain - Technology
Blockchain and Cryptography
Blockchain Beyond Crypto
Blockchain - Advanced Concepts
Blockchain - Decentralization
Blockchain - D-Apps
Blockchain - DeFi
Blockchain - Future Scope
Smart Contracts in Blockchain
Blockchain - Ricardian Contracts
Blockchain - Oracles
Blockchain - DAO
Bitcoin
Bitcoin - Invisible Gold
How Bitcoin Works?
Bitcoin - Network
Bitcoin - Wallets
Bitcoin - Innovations
Ethereum
Ethereum Alternate Cryptocurrency
Ethereum Ecosystem
Ethereum Virtual Machine
Advanced Ethereum
Ethereum Wallets
Ethereum Miner Nodes
Miscellaneous
Blockchain - Double Spending
Public Key Cryptography
Blockchain - Hashing
Bitcoin - Mining
Blockchain - Chaining Blocks
Blockchain - Proof of Work
Blockchain - Network & Mining
Blockchain - Incentives to Miners
Blockchain - Merkle Tree
Blockchain - Payment Verification
Blockchain - Resolving Conflicts
Blockchain - Privacy
Bitcoin - Mitigating Attacks
Blockchain - Conclusion
Blockchain - Quick Guide
Blockchain - Resources
Blockchain - Discussion
Selected Reading
UPSC IAS Exams Notes
Developer's Best Practices
Questions and Answers
Effective Resume Writing
AI Based Resume Builder
Personal AI Study Assistant
Generate Coding Logic
HR Interview Questions
Computer Glossary
Who is Who
Blockchain Tutorial
A blockchain is a growing list of records, called blocks, which are linked using cryptography. Each block contains a cryptographic hash of the previous block, a timestamp, and transaction data. Blockchain has been in a lot of buzz these days. And that is mainly because it is backbone of the very famous cryptocurrency in the world - the Bitcoin. Many Governments and leading Banks have decided to bring many of their conventional transactions based on Blockchain concept. The applications and potential of this framework is huge and is considered to be changing the way transactions are made in various domains.
Audience
This tutorial has been prepared for professionals aspiring to learn the basics of Blockchain. We tried to explain Blockchain concepts through Bitcoin Crypto Currency. This course is going to give you great understanding for the students and professionals aspiring to make a career in the Blockchain technology.
This tutorial will teach you blockchain technology, the driving force behind the cryptocurrency, Bitcoin. You will learn various aspects of cryptography, process of creating and chaining Blocks, Network & Mining and many other concepts associated with blockchain technology including designing of a blockchain network.

[Images saved with this article:]
www.tutorialspoint.com_blockchain_images_blockchain-mini-logo.jpg
www.tutorialspoint.com_blockchain_images_blockchain.jpg