Master Generative AI with 10+ Real-world Projects in 2025!
d
h
m
s
Reading list
10 Applications of Natural Language Processing
Natural Language Processing is among the hottest topic in the field of data science. Companies are putting tons of money into research in this field. Everyone is trying to understand Natural Language Processing and its applications to make a career around it. Every business out there wants to integrate it into their business somehow. In this article you will get to know different types of applications of natural language Processing.
Top 10 Applications of Natural Language Processing
Search Autocorrect and Autocomplete
Whenever you search for something on Google, after typing 2-3 letters, it shows you the possible search terms. Or, if you search for something with typos, it corrects them and still finds relevant results for you. Isn’t it amazing?
It is something that everyone uses daily but never pays much attention to it. It’s a wonderful application of natural language processing and a great example of how it is affecting millions around the world, including you and me. Search autocomplete and autocorrect both help us in finding accurate results much efficiently. Now, various other companies have also started using this feature on their websites, like Facebook and Quora.
The driving engine behind search-autocomplete and autocorrect are the language models. You can read more about language models in this article:A Comprehensive Guide to Build your own Language Model in Python!
Language Translator
Have you ever used Google Translate to find out what a particular word or phrase is in a different language? I’m sure it’s a YES!! and the ease with which it translates a piece of text in one language to another is pretty amazing, right? The technique behind it is Machine Translation.
Machine Translation (MT): Automatically converts text from one language to another while preserving meaning.
Early Systems: Initially based on dictionaries and rules, with limited success.
Advancements: Improved significantly due to neural networks, large datasets, and powerful computing.
Current Accuracy: Modern MT systems provide fairly accurate translations.
Today, tools like Google Translate can easily convert text from one language to another language. These tools are helping numerous people and businesses in breaking the language barrier and becoming successful. Do you want to know about the technique used in Google Translate? Then here is amust-read articlefor you.
Social Media Monitoring
More and more people these days have started using social media for posting their thoughts about a particular product, policy, or matter. These could contain some useful information about an individual’s likes and dislikes. Hence analyzing this unstructured data can help in generating valuable insights. Natural Language Processing comes to rescue here too.
Today, various NLP techniques are used by companies to analyze social media posts and know what customers think about their products. Companies are also using social media monitoring to understand the issues and problems that their customers are facing by using their products. Not just companies, even the government uses it to identify potential threats related to the security of the nation.
If you are also excited about leveraging the natural language processing for monitoring social media, then here are few articles to start your journey:
Comprehensive Hands-on Guide to Twitter Sentiment Analysis with dataset and code
Measuring Audience Sentiments about Movies using Twitter and Text Analytics
Sentiment Analysis of Twitter Posts on Chennai Floods using Python
Chatbots
Customer service and experience are the most important thing for any company. It can help the companies improve their products, and also keep the customers satisfied. But interacting with every customer manually, and resolving the problems can be a tedious task. This is where Chatbots come into the picture. Chatbots help the companies in achieving the goal of smooth customer experience.
Today, many companies use chatbots for their apps and websites, which solves basic queries of a customer. It not only makes the process easier for the companies but also saves customers from the frustration of waiting to interact with customer call assistance.
Additionally, it can reduce the cost of hiring call center representatives for the company. Initially, chatbots were only used as a tool that solved customers’ queries, but today they have evolved into a personal companion. From recommending a product to getting feedback from the customers, chatbots can do everything.
Here’s how you can make a chatbot all by yourself:
Learn how to Build and Deploy a Chatbot in Minutes using Rasa (IPL Case Study!)
Survey Analysis
Surveys are an important way of evaluating a company’s performance. Companies conduct many surveys to get customer’s feedback on various products. This can be very useful in understanding the flaws and help companies improve their products.
But, the problem arises when a lot of customers take the survey leading to increasing data size. It becomes impossible for a person to read them all and draw a conclusion. That’s where companies use natural language processing to analyze the surveys and generate insights from them, like knowing the sentiments of users about an event from the feedbacks and analyzing product reviews to understand the pros and cons. Today, most of the companies use these methods because they provide much more accurate and useful information.
If you want to know how you can do this, then you can read my article in which I have analyzed the reviews of products created by Amazon:A Beginner’s Guide to Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) on Text Data (Amazon Case Study)
Targeted Advertising
One day I was searching for a mobile phone on Amazon, and a few minutes later, Google started showing me ads related to similar mobile phones on various webpages. I am sure you have experienced it.
Do you know what happened here?
Targeted Advertising!!
Yeah! You read it right targeted advertising. Targeted advertising is a type of online advertising where ads are shown to the user based on their online activity. Most of the online companies today use this approach because first, it saves companies a lot of money, and second, relevant ads are shown only to the potential customers.
Targeted advertising works mainly on Keyword Matching. The Ads are associated with a keyword or phrase, and it is shown to only those users who search for the keyword similar to the keyword with which the advertisement was associated. Obviously, that’s not enough, there are other factors like the recent websites they visited, and the webpages they showed interest in, are all taken into account to provide the users with the relevant advertisements of products that they might be interested in.For reading more about the Keyword Matching, clickhere.
Hiring And Recruitment
The Human Resource department is an integral part of every company. They have the most important job of selecting the right employees for a company. But, today, in this highly competitive world, recruiters need to review hundreds or sometimes thousands of resumes for a single position. It might take hours for filtering resumes and shortlisting the candidates. Can this task be automated?
Yes! With the help of natural language processing, recruiters can find the right candidate with much ease. This simply means that the recruiter would not have to go through every resume and filter the right candidates manually. The technique, likeinformation extractionwithnamed entity recognition,can be used to extract information such as skills, name, location, and education. Then, these features can be used to represent the candidates in the feature space, and then they can be classified into the categories of fit or not-fit for a particular role. Or, they can also be recommended a different role based on their resume.
This allows the unbiased filtering of resumes and selection of the best possible candidates for a vacant position without requiring much human labor. Most of the companies useApplication Tracking Systemsfor screening the resumes efficiently.
Voice Assistants
I am sure you’ve already met them, Google Assistant, Apple Siri, Amazon Alexa, ring a bell? Yes, all of these are voice assistants.
A voice assistant is a software that uses speech recognition, natural language understanding, and natural language processing to understand the verbal commands of a user and perform actions accordingly. You might say it is similar to a chatbot, but I have included voice assistants separately because they deserve a better place on this list. They are much more than a chatbot and can do many more things than a chatbot can do.
Today, most of us cannot imagine our lives without voice assistants. Throughout the years, they have transformed into a very reliable and powerful friend. From setting our morning alarm to finding a restaurant for us, a voice assistant can do anything. They have opened a new door of opportunities for both users and companies.
Grammar Checkers
This is one of the most widely used applications of natural language processing. Grammar Checking tools like Grammarly provides tons of features that help a person in writing better content. They can change any ordinary piece of text into beautiful literature. If you want to write an email to your boss or if you’re going to write a report or better an article, there is no denying the fact that you need these helpful friends.
These tools can correct grammar, spellings, suggest better synonyms, and help in delivering content with better clarity and engagement. They also help in improving the readability of content and hence allowing you to convey your message in the best possible way. If you take a look at the condition of grammar checkers five years back, you’ll find that they weren’t nearly as capable as they are today.
You know why?
Because transformers arrived in 2017, and I’m not talking about these.
I am talking about the transformers which are used in natural language processing. They sound interesting, aren’t they? Then you should read this article, which explains everything about the transformers:How do Transformers Work in NLP? A Guide to the Latest State-of-the-Art Models
Email Filtering
Have you ever used Gmail?
I’m sure you have, then you might have already noticed that whenever a mail arrives, it gets classified into the sections of primary, social, and promotions. And the best thing is that the spam emails are also filtered out to a separate section. Isn’t it amazing and beneficial at the same time? Yes, it is, and that’s all email filtering is. And I don’t have to tell you how much our daily tasks rely on this feature.
The emails are filtered using text classification, which is a natural language processing technique. And as you might have already guessed it. Text Classification is the process of classification of a piece of text into pre-defined categories. Another great example of text classification is the classification of news articles into various categories. Here are few resources to getting you started with text classification:
A Comprehensive Guide to Understand and Implement Text Classification in Python
Tutorial on Text Classification (NLP) using ULMFiT and fastai Library in Python
Build Your First Text Classification model using PyTorch
End Notes
Since you’re acquainted with the natural language processing applications, you can now dive into the field of Natural Language Processing. To save you from the headache of searching resources online, I have listed a few wonderful courses related to natural language processing.
Courses:
Introduction to Natural Language Processing
A Comprehensive Learning Path for Deep Learning in 2020
A comprehensive Learning path to become a data scientist in 2020
Certified Program: NLP for Beginners
Natural Language Processing (NLP) Using Python
If you know about any other fantastic application of natural language processing, then please share it in the comment section below.
I hope you enjoyed this article. If you found this article informative, then please share it with your friends, and don’t forget to share your feedback and comment below your queries. Also, comment on the awesome Natural Language Processing Applications you think we missed.
He is a data science aficionado, who loves diving into data and generating insights from it. He is always ready for making machines to learn through code and writing technical blogs. His areas of interest include Machine Learning and Natural Language Processing still open for something new and exciting.
Login to continue reading and enjoy expert-curated content.
Free Courses
Generative AI - A Way of Life
Explore Generative AI for beginners: create text and images, use top AI tools, learn practical skills, and ethics.
Getting Started with Large Language Models
Master Large Language Models (LLMs) with this course, offering clear guidance in NLP and model training made simple.
Building LLM Applications using Prompt Engineering
This free course guides you on building LLM apps, mastering prompt engineering, and developing chatbots with enterprise data.
Improving Real World RAG Systems: Key Challenges & Practical Solutions
Explore practical solutions, advanced retrieval strategies, and agentic RAG systems to improve context, relevance, and accuracy in AI-driven applications.
Microsoft Excel: Formulas & Functions
Master MS Excel for data analysis with key formulas, functions, and LookUp tools in this comprehensive course.
Recommended Articles
Sentiment Analysis Using Python
Sentiment Analysis Using Python
What Are N-Grams and How to Implement Them in P...
What Are N-Grams and How to Implement Them in P...
Natural Language Processing: Step by Step Guide
Natural Language Processing: Step by Step Guide
Part 8: Step by Step Guide to Master NLP –...
Part 8: Step by Step Guide to Master NLP –...
Master Natural Language Processing in 2025 with...
Master Natural Language Processing in 2025 with...
A Guide to Perform 5 Important Steps of NLP Usi...
A Guide to Perform 5 Important Steps of NLP Usi...
Ultimate Guide to Understand and Implement Natu...
Ultimate Guide to Understand and Implement Natu...
Role of NLP in Machine learning
Role of NLP in Machine learning
People to Follow in the field of Natural Langua...
People to Follow in the field of Natural Langua...
Part 1: Step by Step Guide to Master NLP –...
Part 1: Step by Step Guide to Master NLP –...
Responses From Readers
Thanks a lot for this post. Would you mind to write something about Automatic Text Summarisation? I think it is an interesting topic of NLP.
Excellent article, very informative 👌
Excellent article very informative 👌
Write for us
Write, captivate, and earn accolades and rewards for your work
Reach a Global Audience
Get Expert Feedback
Build Your Brand & Audience
Cash In on Your Knowledge
Join a Thriving Community
Level Up Your Data Science Game
Flagship Programs
Free Courses
Popular Categories
Generative AI Tools and Techniques
Popular GenAI Models
AI Development Frameworks
Data Science Tools and Techniques
Continue your learning for FREE
Enter email address to continue
Enter OTP sent to
Edit
Enter the OTP
Resend OTP
Resend OTP in45s

[Images saved with this article:]
www.analyticsvidhya.com_blog_2020_07_top-10-applications-of-natural-language-processing-nlp__0.webp
www.analyticsvidhya.com_blog_2020_07_top-10-applications-of-natural-language-processing-nlp__1.png
www.analyticsvidhya.com_blog_2020_07_top-10-applications-of-natural-language-processing-nlp__2.png
www.analyticsvidhya.com_blog_2020_07_top-10-applications-of-natural-language-processing-nlp__3.webp
www.analyticsvidhya.com_blog_2020_07_top-10-applications-of-natural-language-processing-nlp__4.webp
www.analyticsvidhya.com_blog_2020_07_top-10-applications-of-natural-language-processing-nlp__5.webp
www.analyticsvidhya.com_blog_2020_07_top-10-applications-of-natural-language-processing-nlp__6.webp
www.analyticsvidhya.com_blog_2020_07_top-10-applications-of-natural-language-processing-nlp__7.webp
www.analyticsvidhya.com_blog_2020_07_top-10-applications-of-natural-language-processing-nlp__8.webp
www.analyticsvidhya.com_blog_2020_07_top-10-applications-of-natural-language-processing-nlp__9.png
www.analyticsvidhya.com_blog_2020_07_top-10-applications-of-natural-language-processing-nlp__10.webp
www.analyticsvidhya.com_blog_2020_07_top-10-applications-of-natural-language-processing-nlp__11.webp
www.analyticsvidhya.com_blog_2020_07_top-10-applications-of-natural-language-processing-nlp__12.webp
www.analyticsvidhya.com_blog_2020_07_top-10-applications-of-natural-language-processing-nlp__13.webp
www.analyticsvidhya.com_blog_2020_07_top-10-applications-of-natural-language-processing-nlp__14.webp
www.analyticsvidhya.com_blog_2020_07_top-10-applications-of-natural-language-processing-nlp__15.webp
www.analyticsvidhya.com_blog_2020_07_top-10-applications-of-natural-language-processing-nlp__16.webp
www.analyticsvidhya.com_blog_2020_07_top-10-applications-of-natural-language-processing-nlp__17.webp
www.analyticsvidhya.com_blog_2020_07_top-10-applications-of-natural-language-processing-nlp__18.webp