Tutorial
Examples
Reference
AngularJS Tutorial
Learn AngularJS
AngularJS extends HTML with new attributes.
AngularJS is perfect for Single Page Applications (SPAs).
AngularJS is easy to learn.
This Tutorial
This tutorial is specially designed to help you learn AngularJS as quickly and efficiently as possible.
First, you will learn the basics of AngularJS: directives, expressions, 
filters, modules, and controllers.
Then you will learn everything else you need to know about AngularJS:
Events, DOM, Forms, Input, Validation, Http, and more.
Try it Yourself Examples in Every Chapter
In every chapter, you can edit the examples online, and click on a button to view the result.
AngularJS Example
What You Should Already Know
Before you study AngularJS, you should have a basic understanding of:
HTML
CSS
JavaScript
AngularJS History
AngularJS version 1.0 was released in 2012.
Miško Hevery, a Google employee, started to work with AngularJS in 2009.
The idea turned out very well, and the project is now officially supported by 
Google.
Track Your Progress
Create a free W3Schools account and get access to more features and learning materials:
View your completed tutorials, exercises, and quizzes
Keep an eye on your progress and daily streaks
Set goals and create learning paths
Create your own personal website
Sign Up for Free
Note:This is an optional feature. You can study at W3Schools without creating an account.
AngularJS Examples
W3Schools' AngularJS tutorial contains lots of AngularJS examples!
AngularJS Examples
AngularJS Reference
The AngularJS reference contains all directives and filters used in this tutorial.
AngularJS Reference
COLOR PICKER
Contact Sales
If you want to use W3Schools services as an educational institution, team or enterprise, send us an e-mail:sales@w3schools.com
Report Error
If you want to report an error, or if you want to make a suggestion, send us an e-mail:help@w3schools.com
Top Tutorials
Top References
Top Examples
Get Certified

[Images saved with this article:]
www.w3schools.com_images_img_fa_up_300.png
www.w3schools.com_images_colorpicker2000.png