Kotlin - Home
Kotlin - Overview
Kotlin - Environment Setup
Kotlin - Architecture
Kotlin - Basic Syntax
Kotlin - Comments
Kotlin - Keywords
Kotlin - Variables
Kotlin - Data Types
Kotlin - Operators
Kotlin - Booleans
Kotlin - Strings
Kotlin - Arrays
Kotlin - Ranges
Kotlin - Functions
Kotlin Control Flow
Kotlin - Control Flow
Kotlin - if...Else Expression
Kotlin - When Expression
Kotlin - For Loop
Kotlin - While Loop
Kotlin - Break and Continue
Kotlin Collections
Kotlin - Collections
Kotlin - Lists
Kotlin - Sets
Kotlin - Maps
Kotlin Objects and Classes
Kotlin - Class and Objects
Kotlin - Constructors
Kotlin - Inheritance
Kotlin - Abstract Classes
Kotlin - Interface
Kotlin - Visibility Control
Kotlin - Extension
Kotlin - Data Classes
Kotlin - Sealed Class
Kotlin - Generics
Kotlin - Delegation
Kotlin - Destructuring Declarations
Kotlin - Exception Handling
Kotlin - Quick Guide
Kotlin - Useful Resources
Kotlin - Discussion
Selected Reading
UPSC IAS Exams Notes
Developer's Best Practices
Questions and Answers
Effective Resume Writing
AI Based Resume Builder
Personal AI Study Assistant
Generate Coding Logic
HR Interview Questions
Computer Glossary
Who is Who
Kotlin Tutorial
ThisKotlin Tutorialhas been prepared by well experienced Kotlin Programmers for the beginners to help them understand the basics of Kotlin Programming Language. After completing this tutorial, you will find yourself at a moderate level of expertise in Kotlin, from where you can take yourself to the next levels.
What is Kotlin?
Kotlin is a programming language introduced by JetBrains in 2011, the official designer of the most intelligent Java IDE, named Intellij IDEA. Kotlin is free, has been free and will remain free. It is developed under the Apache 2.0 license and the source code is available on GitHub.
This is a strongly statically typed general-purpose programming language that runs on JVM. In 2017, Google announced Kotlin is an official language for android development. Kotlin is an open source programming language that combines object-oriented programming and functional features into a unique platform. The content is divided into various chapters that contain related topics with simple and useful examples.
Currently, Kotlin mainly targets the Java Virtual Machine (JVM), but also compiles to JavaScript. Kotlin is influenced by other popular programming languages such as Java, C#, JavaScript, Scala and Groovy. The syntax of Kotlin may not be exactly similar to Java Programming Language, however, internally Kotlin is reliant on the existing Java Class library to produce wonderful results for the programmers. Kotlin provides interoperability, code safety, and clarity to the developers around the world.
Kotlin Jobs
Kotlin is very high in demand and all major companies are moving towards Kotlin to develop their web and mobile applications.
Average 	annual salary for a Kotlin developer is around $130,000. Though it can vary depending on the location. Following are the great companies who are using Kotlin:
Google
Google
Amazon
Amazon
Netflix
Netflix
Pinterest
Pinterest
Uber
Uber
Trello
Trello
Coursera
Coursera
Basecamp
Basecamp
Corda
Corda
JetBrains
JetBrains
Many more...
Many more...
So, you could be the next potential employee for any of these major companies. We have develop a great learning material for Kotlin which will help you to prepare for the technical interviews and certification exams based on Kotlin. So, start learning Kotlin using our simple and effective tutorial anywhere and anytime absolutely at your pace.
Kotlin Online Compiler
We have providedKotlin Online Compilerwhich helps you  toEditandExecutethe code directly from your browser. Try to click the iconto run the following Kotlin code to print conventional "Hello, World!".
fun main() {
   var string: String  = "Hello, World!"  // defining a variable
   println("$string")
}
Quizzes & Assignments
This Kotlin tutorial helps you prepare for technical interviews and certification exams. We have provided various quizzes and assignments to check your learning level. Given quizzes have multiple choice type of questions and their answers with short explanation.
Following is a sample quiz, try to attempt any of the given answers:
Q 1- Kotlin has been developed based on the following programming language?
A- Python
B- Scala
C- Java
D- None of the Above
Answer : C
Explanation
Kotlin is 100% compatible with Java.
Audience of Kotlin
This tutorial has been prepared for the beginners to help them understand the basics of Kotlin programming language. After completing this tutorial, you will find yourself at a moderate level of expertise in Kotlin, from where you can take yourself to the next levels.
Prerequisites to Learn Kotlin
Before proceeding with this tutorial you should have a basic understanding of Java programming language. Although it is a beginners tutorial, we assume that the readers have a reasonable exposure to any programming environment and knowledge of basic concepts such as variables, commands, syntax, etc. We strongly recommend that you gain some basic knowledge of Java programming language before proceeding with Kotlin programming.
Kotlin Questions & Answers
You can explore a set of Kotlin Questions and Answers atKotlin Questions & Answers
Frequently Asked Questions about Kotlin
There are some very Frequently Asked Questions(FAQ) about Kotlin, this section tries to answer them briefly.
Kotlin is an object-oriented programming language that is used to develop Android-based applications. It can also be used for web development and building server-side applications.
Kotlin language was developed by a Russia based company named JetBrains in 2010.
The latest version of Kotlin is 1.9.0. However, at the time of writing this tutorial, it is in the beta stage.
Yes, you can use Kotlin for web development. There are several plugins and frameworks of Kotlin are available that help in building web applications, such as Kotlin/JS, Kotlin Server Pages, Kotlin Spring boot and so forth.
Kotlin is considered the future of Android app development due to the following reasons −
It is platform-independent.
Seamless interoperability with Java.
Code safety.
Concise syntax.
Kotlin developers are responsible for planning, designing, and developing apps and software using Kotlin programming language. They contribute in all phases of the development cycle and then test and integrate features as per the need.
The basic concept of Kotlin includes data types, operators, variables, control structures, nullable & non-nullable variables, generics, delegation, functions, mixing Java and Kotlin.
Yes, Kotlin is very easy to learn, especially if you are already familiar with Java programming language. Our Kotlin tutorial will help you learn Kotlin in clear and concise manner.
Here is the summarized list of tips which you can follow to learn Kotlin −
First and most important to make up your mind to learn Kotlin.
Install the required IDE and other software that are essential for Kotlin on your computer system.
Follow our tutorial step by step starting from the very beginning.
Read more articles, watch online courses or buy a book on Kotlin to enhance your knowledge.
Try to develop small software or projects using Kotlin.
You can learn Kotlin in as little as two to three weeks. However, it can take months of practice before you feel comfortable using it. Determining how long it takes to learn Kotlin also depends on how you plan to use it.

[Images saved with this article:]
www.tutorialspoint.com_kotlin_images_kotlin-mini-logo.jpg
www.tutorialspoint.com_kotlin_images_kotlin.jpg
www.tutorialspoint.com_images_run-button.png