Basics of Computer Science - Home
Fundamental Concept
Role of Computer in Today’s World
Computer System
Programming Languages
Hardware and Software
Analog and Digital
Operating System
Internet
Types of Computer
Computer Networking Terminology
Computer Applications
Generations of Computer
Data Processing
Computer Networking
Computer Related Jobs
Electronic Commerce
Software Programming
Algorithm Flowchart
Extranet
Mobile Computer
Windows Desktop Elements
Computer Multimedia
Computer Security
Computer Threat
Computer Virus
Computer Science: Abbreviations
Computer Science: Development
Computer Science: Innovators
Short-cut Keys
Online Quiz
Online Test
Quick Guide
Useful Resources
Discussion
Selected Reading
UPSC IAS Exams Notes
Developer's Best Practices
Questions and Answers
Effective Resume Writing
AI Based Resume Builder
Personal AI Study Assistant
Generate Coding Logic
HR Interview Questions
Computer Glossary
Who is Who
Operating System
An operating system is the fundamental basis of all other application programs. Operating system is an intermediary between the users and the hardware.
Operating system controls and coordinates the use of hardware among application programs. The major services of an operating system are −
Memory management
Disk access
Creating user interface
Managing the different programs operating parallel
Likewise, it controls and manage the hardwares working
Applications of Operating System
Following are the majorapplicationsof an operating system −
An operating system is accountable for the formation and deletion of files and directories.
An operating system is accountable for the formation and deletion of files and directories.
An operating system manages the process of deletion, suspension, resumption, and synchronization.
An operating system manages the process of deletion, suspension, resumption, and synchronization.
An operating system manages memory space by allocation and de-allocation.
An operating system manages memory space by allocation and de-allocation.
An operating system stores, organizes, and names and protects the existing files.
An operating system stores, organizes, and names and protects the existing files.
Further, an operating system manages all the components and devices of the computers system including modems, printers, plotters, etc.
Further, an operating system manages all the components and devices of the computers system including modems, printers, plotters, etc.
In case, if any device fails, the operating system detects and notify.
In case, if any device fails, the operating system detects and notify.
An operating system protects from destruction as well as from unauthorized use.
An operating system protects from destruction as well as from unauthorized use.
An operating system facilitates the interface to user and hardware.
An operating system facilitates the interface to user and hardware.
Types of Operating System
Following are the major types of operating system −
Disk Operating System (DOS)
Windows Operating System
Unix Operating System
Let us now discuss each operating system in detail.
Disk Operating System
MS-DOS is one of the oldest and widely used operating system. DOS is a set of computer programs, the major functions of which are file management, allocation of system resources, providing essential features to control hardware devices.
DOS commands can be typed in either upper case or lower case.
Features of DOS
Following are the significant features of DOS −
It is a single user system.
It controls program.
It is machine independence.
It manages (computer) files.
It manages input and output system.
It manages (computer) memory.
It provides command processing facilities.
It operates with Assembler.
Types of DOS Commands
Following are the major types of DOS Command −
Internal Commands− Commands such as DEL, COPY, TYPE, etc. are the internal commands that remain stored in computer memory.
Internal Commands− Commands such as DEL, COPY, TYPE, etc. are the internal commands that remain stored in computer memory.
External Commands− Commands like FORMAT, DISKCOPY, etc. are the external commands and remain stored on the disk.
External Commands− Commands like FORMAT, DISKCOPY, etc. are the external commands and remain stored on the disk.
Windows Operating System
The operating system window is the extension of the disk operating system.
It is the most popular and simplest operating system; it can be used by any person who can read and understand basic English, as it does not require any special training.
However, the Windows Operating System requires DOS to run the various application programs initially. Because of this reason, DOS should be installed into the memory and then window can be executed.
Elements of Windows OS
Following are the significant element ofWindowsOperatingSystem (WOS) −
Graphical User Interface
Icons (pictures, documents, application, program icons, etc.)
Taskbar
Start button
Windows explorer
Mouse button
Hardware compatibility
Software compatibility
Help, etc.
Versions of Windows Operating System
Following are the different versions of Windows Operating System −
Version
Year
Version
Year
Window 1.01
1985
Windows XP Professional x64
2005
Windows NT 3.1
1993
Windows Vista
2007
Windows 95
1995
Windows 7
2009
Windows 98
1998
Windows 8
2012
Windows 2000
2000
Windows 10
2015
Windows ME
2000
Windows Server 2016
2016
Windows XP
2001
Unix Operating System
The Unix Operating System is the earliest operating system developed in 1970s. Let us consider the following points relating to the Unix Operating System −
It is an operating system that has multitasking features.
It is an operating system that has multitasking features.
It has multiuser computer operating systems.
It has multiuser computer operating systems.
It runs practically on every sort of hardware and provides stimulus to the open source movement.
It runs practically on every sort of hardware and provides stimulus to the open source movement.
It has comparative complex functionality and hence an untrained user cannot use it; only the one who has taken training can use this system.
It has comparative complex functionality and hence an untrained user cannot use it; only the one who has taken training can use this system.
Another drawback of this system is, it does not give notice or warn about the consequences of a users action (whether users action is right or wrong).
Another drawback of this system is, it does not give notice or warn about the consequences of a users action (whether users action is right or wrong).

[Images saved with this article:]
www.tutorialspoint.com_basics_of_computer_science_images_basics-of-computer-science-mini-logo.jpg
www.tutorialspoint.com_basics_of_computer_science_images_operating_system.jpg